Apron: A Library of Numerical Abstract
Domains for Static Analysis ⋆
Bertrand Jeannet1 and Antoine Miné2
1

INRIA Rhône-Alpes, Grenoble, France, Bertrand.Jeannet@inrialpes.fr
2
CNRS, École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France, mine@di.ens.fr

Abstract. This article describes Apron, a freely available library dedicated to the static analysis of the numerical variables of programs by abstract interpretation. Its goal is threefold: provide analysis implementers
with ready-to-use numerical abstractions under a unified API, encourage the research in numerical abstract domains by providing a platform
for integration and comparison, and provide teaching and demonstration
tools to disseminate knowledge on abstract interpretation.

1

Introduction

Static analysis aims at discovering, at compile-time, properties on all the possible
executions of a program, which is useful to, e.g., automatically prove the absence
of errors or optimize code. Numerical static analysis focuses on properties of
numerical program variables. Abstract Interpretation [9] is a general theory of
semantic approximation which allows constructing static analyses that are sound
by construction (i.e., always over-approximate the set of program behaviors). In
the past 30 years, many numerical abstract domains [6, 20, 21, 7, 10, 12, 13, 17]
have been proposed, each defining a representation for a set of properties of
interest and algorithms to manipulate them. They vary in expressiveness and in
the cost/precision trade-off.
However, many abstract domains have no publicly available implementation
while others (e.g., early implementations of [10, 20]) have diverging APIs which
makes reuse and experimental comparisons difficult. Most are tied to application
domains, lacking operators to be useful in more general settings (e.g., [5] does
not support non-linear or floating-point expressions).
The Apron library aims at solving these problems and provides a uniform,
rich, and user-friendly API, which is given a precise concrete semantics that underlying abstract domains are free to implement with safe approximations. It also
provides reference implementations for a growing number of numerical abstract
domains — including intervals, octagons [20], and polyhedra [10]. Static analyzers for all kinds of semantics (including non-linear and floating-point arithmetic)
can easily use Apron to perform their numerical abstractions. Apron also encourages the development of new domains by providing an abstraction toolbox
⋆

This work is supported by the INRIA project-team Abstraction common to the
CNRS and the École Normale Supérieure, and the ANR project ASOPT.

Underlying libraries & abstract domains
box

NewPolka

PPL + Wrapper

convex polyhedra

convex polyhedra

intervals
octagons

b
b
b
b
b

octagons

Abstraction toolbox
– scalar & interval arithmetic
– linearization of expressions
– fall-back implementations

linear equalities

b

linear congruences

Developer interface
Data-types
Coefficients
Expressions
Constraints
Generators
Abs. values

γ

Semantics: A → ℘(Zn × Rm )
dimensions and space dimensionality
Variables and Environments
γ
Semantics: A → ℘(V → Z ⊎ R)
User interface
C API
OCaml binding

C++ binding

Fig. 1. Architecture of the Apron library.

library. New domains can then be plugged into Apron-powered static analyzers
by changing a single line of code, as the API is essentially domain-independent.
The most closely related project is the Parma Polyhedra Library [5], which
shares several features with Apron in its very last version (0.10). However, its
concrete semantics does not support non-linear and floating-point expressions,
and it supports only one global environment for mapping variable names to dimensions in vector spaces. Nevertheless, the domains implemented in the PPL
can be interfaced to Apron and can hence benefit from its additional functionalities.

2

Architecture

The architecture of the library is sketched in Fig. 1. A client analysis would first
create a context manager object that specifies which abstract domain to use,
and then interface to the bottom right part of Fig. 1 by constructing domainindependent operator argument objects and issuing calls to the library. Internally, the library will dispatch the call to the proper domain implementation
(top part), which can in turn use built-in generic abstractions and utility libraries (bottom left part). Due to lack of space, it is not possible to present code
samples in this paper, but short examples can be found on the web-site [1].
Data-types. To communicate with domains, Apron provides various domainindependent concrete data-types to represent scalars, intervals, linear expressions, expression trees, tests, and generators, as well as associated utility functions — constructors, destructors, conversions, etc. Intervals can appear in lin-

ear and non-linear expressions, where they model a non-deterministic choice.
By soundness, all possible outcomes of non-deterministic assignments are taken
into account, and a program state passes a non-deterministic test if it does for
at least one of its possible values. Non-determinism is useful to model program
input but also to abstract complex operators into simpler ones. Operators in expressions include the four standard operations (+, −, ×, /), modulo, and square
root. Each can be tagged with a rounding target type (e.g., integer, or some
IEEE floating-point format [8]) and direction (towards 0, +∞, −∞, to nearest,
or non-deterministic). Constants can be provided as integers, rationals, or floats,
using either machine types or arbitrary precision types — using the GMP [2]
and MPFR [3] libraries.
Abstract elements and operators. Abstract elements are completely opaque datatypes that ultimately represent sets of points in Zn ×Rm . Floating-point variables
can be modeled using real-valued dimensions and expression trees with explicit
rounding tags. Standard operators include linear and non-linear assignments,
substitutions, and constraint additions, joins, meets, widenings, projections, and
various comparisons. Less common operators include n-ary joins, parallel assignments (useful to analyze automata), folds and expands (useful to analyze
summarized arrays [11]).
An important rule is that the implementation is free to perform any sound
approximation. Not imposing precision guarantees allows us to require that all
domains support all operators for all data-types. Imprecision comes from the
well-known limited expressiveness of each domain (e.g., polyhedra cannot encode non-linear constraints nor disjunctions) but also from less obvious implementation details — e.g., internal use of inexact arithmetic, such as floats. Thus,
together with a sound result, domains may also return a flag telling whether the
result is exact, optimal (w.r.t. the domain expressiveness), or neither. Also, operators have a generic cost-precision parameter that has a domain-specific but
documented effect — e.g., polyhedra may gain precision by using integer tightening on integer variables, or lose precision by soundly rounding large constraint
coefficients to more memory-efficient ones.
Abstract domains. Fig. 2 presents a few abstract domain examples, organized
as a lattice showing their respective expressiveness. The boxed domains are
those currently available: intervals, octagons [20] (with either integer, rational
or float bounds, using machine representation, or GMP or MPFR arbitrary precision numbers), polyhedra [10] (using GMP integers and the double description
method), and linear equalities [17] (implemented as an abstraction of polyhedra). Apron can also act as a middle-ware and make foreign libraries available
under its unified API. Linear congruences [13] and an alternate implementation
of polyhedra are optionally available through the PPL [5]. Finally, Apron supports a generic reduced product which is instantiated to combine polyhedra and
linear congruences. Fig. 2 also shows some of the domains we wish to add in the
future to provide either improved expressiveness (e.g., polynomial domains) or
additional cost/precision trade-offs (e.g., weakly relational domains).

Program Annotated prog.

℘(Rn )
polynomial inequalities
polynomial equalities
linear inequalities [10]
(convex polyhedra)

Front-end
(interproc)

linear congruences [13]

linear equalities [17]

Semantic Equations

octahedra [7] 2-vars inequalities [21]
Solver
(Fixpoint )

octagons [20]
intervals

simple congruences [12]

Fig. 2. Some numerical abstract domains, partially ordered by their expressiveness.

Abstract
Domain
(apron)

Fig. 3. Architecture of
the Interproc analyzer.

Abstraction toolbox. Apron exposes a rich, high-level API to domain users that
can chose among a large set of abstract operators and various data-type arguments. However, domain designers wish to implement a minimal set of low-level
entry-points. To ease the burden of developing new domains, Apron provides
several support libraries:
1. Apron provides an environment management package, so that developers
only have to manipulate dimensions in vector-spaces while the user can manipulate named variables and environments — hence the distinct developer
and user interfaces in the right part of Fig. 1.
2. Apron provides a complete arithmetic package for scalar and outwardrounded intervals in a variety of types (integers, rationals, floats; machine
types, GMP, and MPFR numbers). Sound conversion functions are provided
so that developers can choose the most convenient arithmetic type to use
internally and still handle all the API data-types available to the user (e.g.,
polyhedra are implemented using integers but can handle floating-point constants in expressions).
3. Apron provides linearization functions that domains can use to abstract
arbitrary expression trees into linear ones (with or without interval coefficients). In particular, they can handle integer and floating-point expressions
by abstracting away the non-linearity introduced by rounding, and output
linear expressions with R semantics [19]. Linearization is not compulsory and
developers may also access the raw expression trees provided by the user.
4. Apron provides a default implementation for many operators. For instance,
compound operators provided for the user convenience (such as n-ary joins
or parallel assignments) are implemented in terms of simpler ones (regular
joins and assignments). Domain designers are always free to implement those
operators if a specialized implementation would provide some efficiency gain.
Bindings. The core API is in C (27 KLOC) to ensure maximum interoperability,
but it is designed in an object-oriented way. Additionally, a C++ binding (leveraging the object-orientation aspect and adding intelligent constructors, destructors, and operator overloading for improved user-friendliness) and an OCaml

binding (providing stricter type-checking and fully automated memory management) are provided. Other API bindings may be easily designed. As for the C
API, these bindings are fully domain-independent and immediately benefit from
the addition of new abstract domains.
Finally, the library is fully thread-safe and several instances (with possibly
different domains) can be used concurrently through the use of context managers.

3

Applications

Distribution. The Apron library is freely available [1] and is released under
the LGPL license.1 Currently, we are aware of ten other research teams using
Apron. Two of them plan to contribute to its development.
The Interproc static analyzer. Interproc [15] fulfills three goals: provide a
library showcase, disseminate abstract interpretation techniques, and help prototype new domains [6] and analyses [18, 4] — e.g., by encoding problems in the
input language. Its architecture is depicted in Fig. 3. Interproc acts both as a
front-end generating semantic equations from the input program, and as a driver
interpreting the equations in the chosen abstract domain and solving them with
the Fixpoint [14] equation solver.
Interproc takes as input programs written in a small imperative language
featuring numerical variables, loops, and recursive procedures. It performs either
forward analysis that infers invariants at each program point, or backward analysis that infers necessary conditions to reach a given set of control points, or a
combination of both analyses. Procedures are handled in a relational way using
[16]. The output of Interproc is a program annotated with invariants that can
also be interpreted as procedure summaries at the exit point of procedures. Any
of the abstract domains provided by Apron can be selected, as well as several
options regarding iteration strategies in fixpoint solving, thus allowing for easy
experimentation and comparison. Interproc is written in OCaml (2 KLOC,
excluding the Fixpoint solver [14]) and released under the LGPL license.

4

Conclusion

The Apron library provides several numerical abstract domains under a unified
interface. It defines a precise concrete semantics for a quite complete set of operations — including non-linear and floating-point arithmetic — that domains are
free to approximate in a sound way, and that are suitable to build many kind of
static analyses. Apron encourages the development and experimental comparison of new abstract domains by providing a toolbox enabling developers to focus
on the core algorithms of their domain while benefiting for free from powerful
features such as floating-point semantics. Thus, it conciliates two kinds of users
with conflicting requirements: analysis designers wishing for a rich, high-level,
1

However, optional dependencies [5] may be released under a more strict license.

and domain-independent API, and domain designers, wishing to implement a
minimal set of low-level entry-points. Its effectiveness is illustrated by the number of research teams using it and developing new domains. A sample analyzer,
Interproc, demonstrates its use.
In the future, we plan to integrate more numerical abstract domains, but
also to develop abstract domains combining numerical and finite-type (such as
boolean) variables, and extend Interproc accordingly.

References
1. The APRON abstract domain library. http://apron.cri.ensmp.fr/library/.
2. GMP: The GNU multiple precision arithmetic library. http://gmplib.org/.
3. The MPFR library. http://www.mpfr.org/.
4. H. Amjad and R. Bornat. Towards automatic stability analysis for rely-guarantee
proofs. In VMCAI’09, volume 5403 of LNCS, 2009.
5. R. Bagnara, P. M. Hill, and E. Zaffanella. The Parma Polyhedra Library: Toward a
complete set of numerical abstractions for the analysis and verification of hardware
and software systems. SCP, 72(1–2):3–21, 2008.
6. L. Chen, A. Miné, and P. Cousot. A sound floating-point polyhedra abstract
domain. In APLAS’08, volume 5356 of LNCS, pages 3–18. Springer, 2008.
7. R. Clarisó and J. Cortadella. The octahedron abstract domain. In SAS’04, volume
3148 of LNCS, pages 312–327. Springer, 2004.
8. IEEE Computer Society. IEEE standard for binary floating-point arithmetic. Technical report, ANSI/IEEE Std. 745-1985, 1985.
9. P. Cousot and R. Cousot. Abstract interpretation: a unified lattice model for static
analysis of programs by construction or approximation of fixpoints. In POPL’77,
pages 238–252. ACM Press, 1977.
10. P. Cousot and N. Halbwachs. Automatic discovery of linear restraints among
variables of a program. In POPL’78, pages 84–97. ACM Press, 1978.
11. D. Gopan, F. DiMaio, N. Dor, T. Reps, and S. Sagiv. Numeric domains with
summarized dimensions. In TACAS’04, pages 512–529, 2004.
12. P. Granger. Static analysis of arithmetical congruences. In Int. Journal of Computer Mathematics, volume 30, pages 165–190, 1989.
13. P. Granger. Static analysis of linear congruence equalities among variables of a
program. In TAPSOFT’91, volume 493 of LNCS, pages 169–192. Springer, 1991.
14. B. Jeannet. The Fixpoint solver. http://pop-art.inrialpes.fr/people/
bjeannet/bjeannet-forge/fixpoint/.
15. B. Jeannet and al. The Interproc analyzer. http://pop-art.inrialpes.fr/
interproc/interprocweb.cgi.
16. B. Jeannet and W. Serwe. Abstracting call-stacks for interprocedural verification
of imperative programs. In AMAST’04, volume 3116 of LNCS, July 2004.
17. M. Karr. Affine relationships among variables of a program. Acta Informatica,
pages 133–151, 1976.
18. R. Majumdar, A. Gupta, and A. Rybalchenko. An efficient invariant generator. In
TACAS’09, LNCS, 2009.
19. A. Miné. Relational abstract domains for the detection of floating-point run-time
errors. In ESOP’04, volume 2986 of LNCS, pages 3–17. Springer, 2004.
20. A. Miné. The octagon abstract domain. HOSC, 19(1):31–100, 2006.
21. A. Simon, A. King, and J. Howe. Two variables per linear inequality as an abstract
domain. In LOPSTR’02, volume 2664 of LNCS, pages 71–89. Springer, 2002.

