Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580
www.elsevier.com/locate/ic

Fast congruence closure and extensions
Robert Nieuwenhuis ∗,1,2, Albert Oliveras 1 ,3
Technical University of Catalonia, Dept. LSI, Jordi Girona 1, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
Received 9 September 2005; revised 6 June 2006
Available online 25 January 2007

Abstract
Congruence closure algorithms for deduction in ground equational theories are ubiquitous in many
(semi-) decision procedures used for veriﬁcation and automated deduction. In many of these applications one needs an incremental algorithm that is moreover capable of recovering, among the thousands
of input equations, the small subset that explains the equivalence of a given pair of terms. In this paper
we present an algorithm satisfying all these requirements. First, building on ideas from abstract congruence closure algorithms, we present a very simple and clean incremental congruence closure algorithm
and show that it runs in the best known time O(n log n). After that, we introduce a proof-producing
union-ﬁnd data structure that is then used for extending our congruence closure algorithm, without increasing the overall O(n log n) time, in order to produce a k-step explanation for a given equation in
almost optimal time (quasi-linear in k). Finally, we show that the previous algorithms can be smoothly
extended, while still obtaining the same asymptotic time bounds, in order to support the interpreted
functions symbols successor and predecessor, which have been shown to be very useful in applications
such as microprocessor veriﬁcation.
© 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
PACS: 89.20.Ff; 84.30.Bv; 07.05.Bx; 95.75.Pq; 02.10.-v

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: roberto@lsi.upc.edu (R. Nieuwenhuis).
URLs: www.lsi.upc.edu/∼roberto (R. Nieuwenhuis), www.lsi.upc.edu/∼oliveras (A. Oliveras).
1 Partially supported by Spanish Min. of Educ. and Science through the LogicTools project (TIN2004-03382).
2 Partially supported by personal grant “SMT Solvers for High-Level Hardware Veriﬁcation” from Intel Corporation.
3 Partially supported by Spanish Min. of Educ. and Science through a FPU Grant AP2002-3533.

0890-5401/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ic.2006.08.009

558

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

Keywords: Decision procedures; Congruence closure; Equational reasoning; Veriﬁcation

1. Introduction
Union-ﬁnd data structures maintain the equivalence relation induced by a given sequence of Union
operations between pairs of elements. Similarly, congruence closure algorithms maintain a congruence relation given by a sequence of pairs of terms (i.e., equations) without variables. The difference
between equivalence closure and congruence closure is that the congruence relation, in addition to
reﬂexivity, symmetry and transitivity, also satisﬁes the monotonicity axioms saying, for all f , that
f(a1 . . . an )=f(b1 . . . bn ) whenever ai=bi for all i in 1 . . . n.
Example 1. The equation a=b belongs to the congruence generated by the three equations: b=d,
f(b)=d, and f(d)=a. This is equivalent to saying that a=b is a logical consequence (in ﬁrst-order
logic with equality) of these three ground equations.
Decision procedures based on congruence closure are used in numerous deduction and veriﬁcation systems, where the generation of explanations is highly desirable if not required. For instance,
this is the case in decision procedures for SMT (SAT Modulo Theories), i.e., procedures for deciding the satisﬁability of Boolean formulae over ground atoms with symbols that are interpreted in
some theory. One important class of SMT problems is called EUF (Equality with Uninterpreted
Functions), containing atoms that are equalities between terms built over uninterpreted function
symbols. EUF (i.e., SAT modulo the theory of congruences) is important in applications such as the
veriﬁcation of pipelined processors [1], where, if the control is veriﬁed, the concrete data operations
can be abstracted by uninterpreted function symbols.
The lazy approaches to SMT, e.g. [2–6] are lazy in the sense that initially each equality atom is simply abstracted by considering it as a distinct propositional variable, and the resulting propositional
formula is sent to a propositional SAT solver. If the SAT solver reaches a (partial) model that is not
a congruence, the model is precluded by adding a new propositional clause called an explanation;
this is iterated (many times) until the SAT solver ﬁnds a congruence model or all assignments have
been explored.
Example 2. Assume that, in such a lazy approach, the model being built by the SAT solver is fed into
the congruence closure algorithm as a (long!) sequence of atoms that, in particular, includes b=d,
f(b)=d, and f(d)=a. Then, if additionally a = b is given, it is no longer a congruence (see Example
1).
At that point, the congruence closure algorithm has to generate the new clause b=d ∧ f(b)=
d ∧ f(d)=a −→ a=b, because the ﬁrst three atoms are the explanation of a=b. It is hence crucial
in these applications to efﬁciently recover this small explanation among the (thousands of) input
equations.
Another recent approach for the ﬂexible generation of decision procedures is called DPLL(T )
[7]. The basic idea is similar to the CLP (X) scheme for constraint logic programming: to
provide a clean and efﬁcient integration of specialized theory solvers within the

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

559

Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland procedure [8,9]. A general engine DPLL(X ) is used, where
X can be instantiated with a solver for a given theory T , thus producing a system DPLL(T ). Each
time the DPLL(T ) procedure produces a conﬂict, explanations need to be generated by the theory
solver for building the conﬂict graph that is used for non-chronological backtracking in modern SAT
solvers like Chaff [10]. The fact that this approach currently outperforms previous techniques on
logics with equality is largely due to the efﬁcient incremental algorithm for congruence closure
with explanations described here (see [7] for details about the DPLL(T ) approach and experiments on benchmarks from a large variety of veriﬁcation problems). In the 2005 SAT Modulo
Theories Competition (SMT-COMP; see [11] as well as the results on the web), our DPLL(T)
implementation in BarcelogicTools won all four divisions in which it participated (out of seven
divisions).
Since in such an incremental setting many Explain operations occur during a single congruence
closure procedure, it is important to efﬁciently recover these explanations, even at the expense of
making the congruence closure algorithm slightly slower in practice. Recovering small explanations is well-known to be crucial for efﬁciency, but one cannot afford to use a naive approach
for that, since then the cost of Explain would strongly dominate the O(n log n) runtime of the
overall congruence closure algorithm. Here we present, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst congruence closure algorithm able to produce these explanations in an efﬁcient way, quasi-linear in the size of
the explanation, without increasing the asymptotic O(n log n) runtime of the overall congruence
closure.
This article is structured as follows.
Some preliminaries on terms, relations, congruences and on the classical Union-Find data structure are given in Section 2.
In Section 3 we describe a simple and efﬁcient algorithm for incremental congruence closure,
whose implementation is described in Section 3.3. Despite an expert reader may skip Sections 3.4
and 3.5, we include them here for the self-containedness of the paper. In them, we prove the correctness of the algorithm and we show that it runs in O(n log n) time, as the fastest known congruence
closure algorithms.
Section 4 of this paper is on union-ﬁnd data structures with Explain. Indeed, already for unionﬁnd data structures the problem requires some thinking, since the information about the original
input unions is, in general, lost in the compact representations of the equivalence relation. We describe a union-ﬁnd data structure that has optimal O(k) Explain operations and optimal Find, at
the expense of a slightly more costly Union, which has an amortized time bound of O(log n).
In Section 5 the latter union-ﬁnd data structure is applied inside our incremental congruence
closure algorithm, in order to produce explanations. Its complexity is analyzed in Section 5.1, where
we show that the use of this more costly union-ﬁnd algorithm (needed for bookkeeping the explanations) does not increase the overall O(n log n) runtime. The Explain operation is given in Section 5.2
and analyzed in detail in Section 5.3 showing that it is almost optimal, running in O(k (k, k))
time for a k-step explanation, where (k, k) (related to the inverse of Ackermann’s function) is in
practice never larger than 4. Section 5.4 discusses quality issues of explanations, gives extensive
experimental results, and introduces several extensions with practical impact of our explanation
algorithms.
In Section 6 the whole framework is extended in order allow an integer interpretation and input
formulae containing arbitrary terms built over uninterpreted symbols as well as over the interpreted

560

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

functions symbols successor and predecessor. Equivalently, one can consider that all subterms t can
in fact be of the form t + k, for some concrete integer value k, called an integer offset. Dealing with
EUF with integer offsets has been shown to be very useful in applications such as microprocessor
veriﬁcation [12]. Here we prove that with this extension of our algorithms the same asymptotic time
bounds can be maintained for all operations.
We ﬁnally compare with related work and conclude in Section 7.

2. Preliminaries
Let F be a ﬁnite set of function symbols with an arity function arity: F →N. Function symbols
g with arity(g) = n are called n-ary symbols (when n = 1, one says unary and when n = 2, binary).
If arity(g) = 0, then g is a constant symbol. The set of ground terms over F , denoted by T (F), is
the smallest set containing all constant symbols such that g(t1 , . . . , tn ) is in T (F) whenever g ∈ F ,
arity(g) = n, and t1 , . . . , tn ∈ T (F). In the rest of the paper, possibly subscripted or primed a, b, c, d
and e always denote constants. Similarly, s, t and u will denote arbitrary terms and f , g and h denote
non-constant function symbols.
By |s| we denote the size (number of symbols) of a ground term s: we have |a| = 1 if a is a
constant symbol and for non-constant terms we have that |g(t1 , . . . , tn )| = 1 + |t1 | + . . . + |tn |. The
depth of a term s is denoted by depth(s) and is deﬁned: depth(a) = 1 if a is a constant symbol and
depth(g(t1 , . . . , tn )) = 1 + max(depth(t1 ), . . . , depth(tn )).
A binary relation R over a set E is a subset of E × E . It is an equivalence relation if it is reﬂexive,
symmetric, and transitive. An equivalence relation induces a partition of E into equivalence classes.
Two elements a and b belong to the same equivalence class if and only if (a, b) ∈ R. In this case,
we will say that they are equivalent (in R). Given a binary relation R, its equivalence closure is the
smallest equivalence relation containing R.
A binary relation R on T(F ) is monotonic if (g(s1 , . . . , sn ) , g(t1 , . . . , tn ) ) ∈ R whenever g is an n-ary
function symbol in F and (si , ti ) ∈ R for all i in 1 . . . n. A congruence relation is a monotonic equivalence relation. Any congruence relation R induces a partition of T(F ) into congruence classes, where
two terms s and t belong to the same congruence class if and only if (s, t) ∈ R. In this case we say
that s and t are congruent (in R). A (ground) equation is an (unordered) pair of ground terms (s, t),
denoted by s = t. The size of an equation s = t will be 1 + |s| + |t| and the size of a set of equations
E, denoted |E|, will be the sum of the sizes of its equations. Given a set of equations E built over F ,
we denote by E ∗ the congruence closure of E: the smallest congruence relation over T(F ) containing
E. We sometimes write E |= s = t to denote that (s, t) belongs to E ∗ ; if E  is a set of equations, we
write E |= E  to denote that E |= s = t for all s = t in E  , and we write E ≡ E  to denote that E |= E 
and E  |= E.
Here we also give some basic notions about the union-ﬁnd data structure (see, e.g., [13] for
details). The union-ﬁnd data type maintains the equivalence closure of a binary relation U =
{ (e1 , e1 ), . . . , (ep , ep ) } given incrementally (on-line) as a sequence of operations Union(e1 , e1 ), . . . ,
Union(ep , ep ). Each equivalence class is identiﬁed by its representative, which is a certain element
of the class. After initializing the data type with the singleton classes {e1 }, {e2 }, . . . , {en }, it supports
the operations:

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

561

• Union(e, e ): merges the classes containing e and e into a new class. We will assume that e and
e were not in the same class prior to the operation, or, equivalently, that redundant unions are
ignored.
• Find(e): returns the current representative of the class containing e.

3. Congruence closure
3.1. Initial transformations
Although well-known congruence closure algorithms exist, the classical ones of Downey, Sethi
and Tarjan [14], Nelson and Oppen [15] and Shostak [16] are not very convenient for our purposes. They are formulated on graphs, and, in order to obtain the best known worst-case complexity
bound, O(n log n), rather involved manipulations are needed; for example, a transformation to
graphs of outdegree 2 is applied, see [14].
Since our DPLL procedure will call the congruence closure module a large number of times,
and since we will extend our procedure to richer logics, we prefer to replace this transformation by
another cleaner one, at the formula representation level, which is done once and for all, already on
the input formula given to our DPLL(EUF) procedure.
Our initial transformation consists of Curryfying the terms, and then, as in [17,18], introducing
new constant symbols c for giving names to non-constant subterms t. These two steps will produce
an equivalent problem whose size is linear with respect to the original one.
3.1.1. Transformation into Curry terms
The ﬁrst step of our initial transformation consists of Curryfying all input terms. After that, there
will be only one binary “apply” function symbol (denoted in the following by f ) and constants.
More formally: consider a new signature F  obtained from the original F by introducing a new
binary function symbol “f ”, and converting all other symbols into constants. Then the Curry form
of a term t in T(F ) is a term Curry (t) in T(F  ) deﬁned as follows:

Curry (c) = c, if c is a constant symbol, and
Curry (g(t1 ...tn )) = f(. . . f( f(g, Curry (t1 )), Curry (t2 )), . . . , Curry (tn ))
For example, the Curry form of g(a, h(b), c)) is f(f(f(g, a), f(h, b)), c). Similarly, we consider the
Curry transformation on equations, where Curry (s = t) is Curry (s) = Curry (t), and also on sets of
equations, where Curry (E) is {Curry (eq) | eq ∈ E}. We make the following simple observations:
Proposition 3. Let t be a term. Then |Curry (t)| ≤ 2|t|−1, i.e., the Curry transformations only produces
a linear growth of the input.
Proposition 4. Let E be a set of equations over F and let s = t be an equation over F . Then Curry (E) |=
Curry (s = t) if, and only if, E |= s = t.
3.1.2. Flattening into terms of depth at most 2
The second step consists of introducing new constant symbols c for giving names to non-constant
subterms t; such t are then replaced everywhere by c and the equation t = c is added. More formally,

562

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

consider the following transformation step on E:
E ⇒ E  ∪ {c = t}

(Constant introduction and replacement ),

where c is a fresh constant symbol and E  is obtained by replacing all occurrences of t in E by c.
For example, we ﬂatten the equation f(f(f(g, a), f(h, b)), b) = b by replacing it by { f(g, a) =
c, f(h, b) = d, f(c, d) = e, f(e, b) = b }. We have the following:
Proposition 5. Let E0 be a set of equations, let s = t be an equation, (both built over F  ), and let E
be obtained by applying zero or more constant introduction and replacement steps on E0 . Then the
following holds:
(1) E0 |= s = t if, and only if, E |= s = t.
(2) If a and b are constants not occurring in E ∪ {s = t}, then E |= s = t if, and only if, E ∪ {s =
a, t = b} |= a = b.
(3) By applying a linear number of constant introduction and replacement steps to E0 an E can be
obtained such that all equations of E have a constant side, E has depth at most 2, and |E| ≤ 2|E0 |.
As a consequence of Proposition 5 we can assume that our congruence closure module receives
as input only equations between two constants or between a constant and a “f ” applied to two constants. In a DPLL(EUF) setting, this transformation is done once and for all on the initial problem.
After this, the atoms in our EUF formula will be (dis)equalities between constants: all equations
involving function symbols will have already be sent to the congruence closure module. However,
these transformations can also be done back and forth at each call to our the congruence closure
procedure.
3.2. Incremental congruence closure
Here we will deﬁne an incremental congruence closure algorithm: we are given a sequence of
equations over T(F  ) intermixed with questions about whether two terms s, t over T(F  ) are currently congruent. Formally, the abstract data type we will consider for incremental congruence
closure stores a set of equations E0 and supports the following operations:
• Merge (t=c): the equation t=c is added to E0 . We require t to be either a constant or a ﬂat term
of the form f(a, b).
• AreCongruent?(s, t): returns “yes” if s and t currently belong to the same congruence class, i.e.,
E0 |= s=t, and “no” otherwise.
3.3. Implementation
The procedure uses the following ﬁve simple data structures, which induce the equivalence class
representation. As said, each equivalence class is identiﬁed by its representative, which is a certain
constant of the class. The procedure we will present maintains the invariants for data structures 2,
3, 4 and 5 described below:

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

563

(1) Pending: a list whose elements are input equations a=b, or pairs of input equations (f(a1 , a2 )=
a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) where ai and bi are already congruent for i in {1, 2}. In both cases, we inserting
such an element in Pending, if the merge of the constants a and b is pending. The need of
adding pairs of the form (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) instead of simply adding a=b will be clear
in Section 5. When needed, Pending will be seen as a set of equations. In this case, a pair
(f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) will represent the equation a=b.
(2) The Representative table: an array indexed by constants, containing for each constant its current representative.
(3) The Class lists: for each representative, the list of all constants in its class.
(4) The Use lists: for each representative a, UseList (a) is the list of input equations f(b1 , b2 )=b
such that a is the representative of b1 or of b2 (or of both).
(5) The Lookup table: for all pairs of representatives (b, c), Lookup (b, c) is some input equation
f(a1 , a2 )=a such that b and c are the current respective representatives of a1 and a2 whenever
such an equation exists. Otherwise, Lookup (b, c) is ⊥.
Since initially no input equations have been processed the data structures UseList and Pending
are initialized as empty and Lookup (a, b) is ⊥ for all pairs (a, b). For each constant a, ClassList (a)
is initialized to contain only a and Representative (a) is set to a. Note that Lookup could be stored
in a hash table, since a 2-dimensional array will be almost empty. In the following algorithms, a
always denotes Representative (a) for each constant a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Procedure Merge(s=t)
If s and t are constants a and b Then
add a=b to Pending
Propagate()
Else /* s=t is of the form f(a1 , a2 )=a */
If Lookup(a1 , a2 ) is some f(b1 , b2 )=b Then
add ( f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b ) to Pending
Propagate()
Else
set Lookup(a1 , a2 ) to f(a1 , a2 )=a
add f(a1 , a2 )=a to UseList (a1 ) and to UseList (a2 )
Procedure Propagate()
While Pending is non-empty Do
Remove E of the form a=b or (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) from Pending
If a  = b and, wlog., |ClassList (a )| ≤ |ClassList (b )| Then
old_repr_a := a
For each c in ClassList (old _repr_a ) Do
set Representative (c) to b
move c from ClassList (old _repr_a ) to ClassList (b )
For each f(c1 , c2 )=c in UseList (old _repr_a )
If Lookup(c1 , c2 ) is some f(d1 , d2 )=d Then
add (f(c1 , c2 )=c, f(d1 , d2 )=d) to Pending
remove f(c1 , c2 )=c from UseList (old _repr_a )

564

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

24.
25.
26.

Else
set Lookup(c1 , c2 ) to f(c1 , c2 )=c
move f(c1 , c2 )=c from UseList (old _repr_a ) to UseList (b )

Informally, each iteration of Propagate() picks a pending equation. If the equation is not redundant, lines 18 and 19 add it to the union-ﬁnd data structure with eager path compression. Lines
20–26 traverse the UseList of the constant whose representative has changed and, checking the
Lookup table, detect new pairs of constants to be merged.
The AreCongruent?(s, t) function is much simpler. It only checks whether the function Normalize
described below rewrites both s and t into the same term.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Procedure Normalize(t)
If t is a constant Then
return t 
Else /* t is f(t1 , t2 ) */
u1 :=Normalize(t1 )
u2 :=Normalize(t2 )
If u1 and u2 are constants and Lookup(u1 , u2 ) is f(a1 , a2 ) = a Then
return a
Else
return f(u1 , u2 )

In order to be used in an SMT setting, a congruence closure procedure needs to be backtrackable. For that purpose in our implementation we used a mixed policy which proved to be efﬁcient
in practice. The changes on the Representative and ClassList data structures are stacked in order
to be undone, but the Lookup table is not restored under backtrack, but instead has time stamps to
indicate whether its information is valid or not.
3.4. Correctness
In this section we prove the correctness of the previously presented algorithm. Similarly to Section 3.5, these results are presented for the self-containedness of the paper and can be skipped by
the expert reader.
The aim of the algorithm is to process a set of equations E0 and to be able to answer whether an
equation belongs to the congruence closure of E0 . Internally, the procedure Merge will compute
the congruence closure of the input equations in the following standard form:
Deﬁnition 6. A set of equations E is in standard form if its equations are of the form a = b or
of the form f(a, b) = c whose (respective) left hand side terms a and f(a, b) only occur once
in E.
Deﬁnition 7. Let E0 be a set of equations of the form a = b or of the form f(a, b) = c. A standard
congruence closure for E0 is a set of equations E in standard form such that E0 ≡ E.
In the following, again a , b , c , . . . denote the current representatives of the constants a, b, c, . . ..
The set of equations already input to our algorithm is denoted by E0 . At any point of the algorithm,

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

565

we denote by RepresentativeE the set of all non-trivial equations of the form a = a and of the
form f(a , b ) = c where a, b and c are constants in E0 and Lookup (a , b ) is f(c1 , c2 ) = c for some
constants c1 and c2 .
We will prove that after the set E0 of input equations has been processed, RepresentativeE is a
standard congruence closure for E0 .
Lemma 8. Apart from the invariants of the data structures 2, 3, 4, and 5, the following invariants hold
each time line 13 is executed and after each call to Merge .
Inv1: RepresentativeE is in standard form
Inv2: (RepresentativeE ∪ Pending )∗ = E0∗
Proof . Invariant Inv1 always holds by deﬁnition of RepresentativeE. The invariants of the data
structures 2, 3, 4 and 5, as well as invariant Inv2 trivially hold before any input equation is processed. Given an input equation s=t, lines 3 and 7 make sure that the equation is added to Pending . If
lines 10 and 11 are executed the equation is added to RepresentativeE and also Lookup and UseList
are modiﬁed to preserve the data structure invariants. Hence if Propagate() preserves all invariants,
so it does the procedure Merge .
To see that Propagate() preserves all invariants, we check lines 14, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25 and 26, which
are the only ones that modify the data structures, and show that the congruence (RepresentativeE ∪
Pending )∗ is changed by no iteration: (i) each time an equation is removed from Pending (line 14),
lines 18 and 19 ensure that this equality will belong to the next RepresentativeE, and also preserve
the invariants of the data structures 2 and 3; (ii) all equations c = d that are added to Pending
(at line 22.) are in the previous (RepresentativeE ∪ Pending )∗ : if the input equation f(c1 , c2 ) = c
is processed it is because, say, c1 (the reasoning is the same for c2 ) has changed its representative
from a to b , and f(a , c2 ) and f(b , c2 ) were congruent to c and d, respectively, in the previous
(RepresentativeE ∪ Pending )∗ . Moreover, we can remove f(c1 , c2 ) = c from the UseList (at line 23)
because old_repr_a is no longer a representative; (iii) lines 25 and 26 ensure that Lookup (a , b ) is
deﬁned for all input terms f(a, b) and that the UseList for each representative contains all needed
equations, i.e., they preserve the invariants for UseList and Lookup .

Now the following result easily follows:
Theorem 9. After a set of equations E0 has been processed, the following holds:
(1) RepresentativeE is a standard congruence closure for the input E0 .
(2) For any two terms s and t, AreCongruent?(s, t) returns "yes" if and only if s=t is in the congruence
closure of E0 .
Proof . For the ﬁrst claim, note that when the procedure terminates Pending is always empty. Then,
since (RepresentativeE ∪ Pending )∗ = E0∗ by invariant Inv2, we know that also RepresentativeE∗ = E0∗ .
Finally, since by invariant Inv1 RepresentativeE is in standard form, RepresentativeE is a standard
congruence closure for the input E0 .
For the second claim, note that RepresentativeE, with the equations oriented from left to right,
is a convergent term rewrite system for E0 and AreCongruent?(s, t) simply checks whether s and t
have the same normal form.


566

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

3.5. Runtime analysis
Theorem 10. A sequence of n Merge operations can be processed in O(n log n) time, and hence each one
of them in O(log n) amortized time. Furthermore, each question AreCongruent?(s, t) can be answered
in O(|s| + |t|) and the space required for the whole sequence is O(n).
Proof . As said, an amortized analysis is done over the whole sequence of n Merge operations. The
procedure Merge itself has no loops. Concerning Propagate(), let m be the number of different
constants (note that m ≤ 3n). The loop at lines 18 and 19 is executed in total O(m log m) times,
namely when some constant changes its representative. For each one of the m constants this cannot
happen more than log m times, because the size of its class is at least doubled each time and is upper
bounded by m. In the loop at lines 21–26, each one of the at most n input equations of the form
f(c1 , c2 )=c is treated when c1 or c2 changes its representative (which, as before, cannot happen more
than log m times). Altogether, we obtain an O(n log n) runtime. Re-using UseList and ClassList
nodes, only linear space is required.
Each question AreCongruent?(s, t) amounts to computing the normal form of s and t, and to
checking whether they are syntactically equal. Normalize (t) clearly takes linear time in t and comparing the two canonized terms can also be done in time O(|s| + |t|), since the canonization of a
term never has size larger than the term itself. 

4. Producing explanations from UF
In this section we extend the classical union-ﬁnd data structure in order to support the following
operation, that is able to explain at any point of the computation “why” two given elements e and
e are equivalent at that moment:
• Explain(e, e ): if a sequence U of unions of pairs (e1 , e1 ) . . . (ep , ep ) has taken place, it returns
a minimal subset E of U such that (e, e ) belongs to the equivalence relation generated by E
and it returns ⊥ if no such E exists.
Example 11. Given the numbered sequence of Union operations:
(1, 8), (7, 2), (3, 13), (7, 1), (6, 7), (9, 5), (9, 3), (14, 11) , (10, 4), (12, 9), (4, 11) , (10, 7)
                                   
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

a call to Explain(e1 , e4 ) returns the explanation {(e7 , e1 ), (e10 , e7 ), (e10 , e4 )}.
Since we assume that no redundant union is processed, we have the following:
Proposition 12. The subset E returned by Explain is unique if it exists.
Proof . Consider the undirected graph which has as edges the pairs in the sequence U of unions.
Since U includes no redundant unions, this graph has no cycles. It is easy to see that Explain(e, e )
consists exactly of the edges on the unique path between e and e . 

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

567

Here we develop a data structure in which Explain can be answered in optimal time O(k) for a
k-step proof, at the expense of slightly more costly Unions, which have an amortized time bound of
O(log n).
The main idea is to consider the graph which has as edges the pairs in the sequence U of unions.
As said, since U includes no redundant unions, this graph has no cycles, i.e., it is a forest, and
therefore Explain(e, e ) consists exactly of the edges on the unique path between e and e . Of course
this forest can be maintained with only constant work at each Union, and hence the only problem
is how to efﬁciently ﬁnd this unique path for a given Explain operation.
For this purpose we will choose a root for each tree and direct all its edges towards that root.
With this structure being invariant, Explain(e, e ) will amount to returning the edges in the paths
from e and e to their common ancestor, which is computable in time O(k), k being the length of
the proof. This concrete structure, which in the following will be called proof forest, can be kept
invariant as follows. At each Union(e, e ), assume, w.l.o.g., that the tree of e has no more elements
than the one of e , and do:
(1) Reverse all edges on the path between e and the root of its tree.
(2) Add an edge e → e .
It is not difﬁcult to see that this preserves the aforementioned tree structure, as well as the invariant
that the path between two nodes is found by computing their nearest common ancestor. Moreover, each time an edge is reversed, the size of its tree is at least doubled. Therefore we have the
following:
Lemma 13. In a sequence of n−1 Union operations, each edge in the proof forest is reoriented at most
O(log n) times.
Example 14. (Example 11 revisited).
Assume again that the following sequence of unions takes place:
(1, 8), (7, 2), (3, 13), (7, 1), (6, 7), (9, 5), (9, 3), (14, 11) , (10, 4), (12, 9), (4, 11) , (10, 7)
                                   
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Then the proof forest could be as follows (but note that it is not unique):
8→1 →7 ←2
↑
14 → 11 → 4 → 10
6

12 → 9 → 3 → 13
↑
5

The algorithm we propose is to use the standard union-ﬁnd with path compression and maintain
at the same time the proof forest, which can be represented by an array of pointers (integers) to
parents, as it is done in the union-ﬁnd data structure itself. Altogether, the only operation whose
cost will be increased is Union.
Theorem 15. In a sequence of m ≥ n ﬁnds and n−1 intermixed unions, the previous data structure
performs each Union in an amortized time bound of O(log n). Moreover, any Explain(e, e ) operation
is supported in O(k) where k is the size of the proof.

568

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

Proof . For every call to Union the only extra work to be done is the reorientation of the appropriate edges. Since we will have a maximum of n−1 edges and each edge will be reoriented at most
O(log n) times, this extra work will be O(n log n) in the whole sequence, hence giving an amortized
time bound of O(log n) for each Union. Note that the Find operations are still as efﬁcient as in [19].
As explained above, Explain(e, e ) will consist of all the edges in the paths from e and e to their
common ancestor, which, due to the invariant structure of the proof forest, is computable in time
O(k). 

5. Producing explanations from congruence closure
In this section we use the union-ﬁnd data structure presented in Section 4 in order to extend the
congruence closure algorithm of Section 3 to support the following operation:
• Explain(c1 , c2 ): assume a sequence M of merges (s1 , t1 ) . . . (sp , tp ) has occurred, and that (c1 , c2 )
is in the congruence closure of M ; then Explain(c1 , c2 ) returns a subset E = {(si1 , ti1 ) . . . (sik , tik )}
of M , with 1 ≤ i1 < . . . < ik ≤ p, such that exactly at the ik -th merge c1 and c2 became congruent, due to the merge operations in E.
The only addition to the congruence closure algorithm presented in Section 3.3 is to consider the
proof forest mentioned in the previous section, which stores the necessary information to implement the required Explain operation. The procedures Merge , AreCongruent? and Normalize do not
need to be changed, whereas the Propagate procedure is slightly modiﬁed by adding the necessary
information to the proof forest (the framed line 6 in the following algorithm):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Procedure Propagate()
While Pending is non-empty Do
Remove E of the form a=b or (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) from Pending
If a  = b and, wlog., |ClassList (a )| ≤ |ClassList (b )| Then
old_repr_a := a

6.

Insert edge a → b labelled with E into the proof forest

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

For each c in ClassList (old _repr_a ) Do
set Representative (c) to b
move c from ClassList (old _repr_a ) to ClassList (b )
For each f(c1 , c2 )=c in UseList (old _repr_a )
If Lookup(c1 , c2 ) is some f(d1 , d2 )=d Then
add (f(c1 , c2 )=c, f(d1 , d2 )=d) to Pending
remove f(c1 , c2 )=c from UseList (old _repr_a )
Else {
set Lookup(c1 , c2 ) to f(c1 , c2 )=c
move f(c1 , c2 )=c from UseList (old _repr_a ) to UseList (b )

Although in Explain(c1 , c2 ) we assume c1 and c2 to be constants, we will see that the previous
operation can be extended to Explain(s, t) for arbitrary terms s and t with only extra O( |s| + |t| )
time. Another important thing to remark is that sometimes multiple explanations are possible. Our

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

569

choice here is to return the oldest possible explanation since returning the shortest explanation is
NP-hard and even returning irredundant explanations is not easy, as we will see in Section 5.4.
5.1. Complexity due to proof forest maintenance
Since only Propagate() is modiﬁed, by adding line 6, the complexity of the procedure
AreCongruent? will not be changed. As for Merge , note that during a sequence of n Merge operations, line 6 will be executed every time two classes are merged, that is, at most m times, where m
is the number of constants. Each time, the only work to be done is the reorientation of the appropriate edges in the proof forest. Since there are at most m edges and each edge is reoriented at most
O(log m) times, line 6 will only add O(m log m) to the total complexity, which will remain O(n log n).
Hence the complexity results in Theorem 10 also apply here.
5.2. Implementation of Explain
The Explain operation will be performed on the proof forest previously deﬁned. As said,
each edge a − b is labelled with a single input equation a=b or with a pair of input structural
equations (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b). Intuitively, the information on the label represents the reasons why the edge was added. The way the proof forest (and the information associated to
its edges) is represented is not described here; it can be done e.g., as in Subsection 4, by an
array of pointers. The way Explain is implemented is described informally by means of the
following example:
Example 16. Below we show a numbered sequence of six Merge operations and the state of the proof
forest after processing them. Each edge of the proof forest is annotated with its corresponding input
equation or pair of input equations:
f(g, h)=d , 
c=d , f(g, d)=a, 
e=c , 
e=b , 
b=h ,
  
  
1

1,3

2

4

3

2

4

5

5

6

6

a −→ d ←− c ←− e ←− b ←− h
On an Explain(a, b) operation, the nearest common ancestor d is detected, and the merge operations on the paths ad (1,3) and bd (5,4,2) are output as part of the proof; but from 1 and 3
also recursively Explain(h, d) needs to be output. In order to obtain the desired complexity bound,
it is necessary to avoid repeated visits to nodes like b, e, c, d in such recursive calls. After the merge
operations in the path bd have been output, the constants b, e, c and d can be considered to be
inside the same equivalence class C. Since the information in the edges in the path bd has already
been output, in any future traversal one can jump from any element of C to d (here d is the highest
node of C, the element of C that is closest to the root of its tree in the proof forest). Hence, in the
recursive call to Explain(h, d), only the edge b − h is traversed, since from b one can directly jump
to d. 
Although the algorithm seems quite simple, avoiding such repeated visits is a little bit tricky. The
solution we propose uses an additional union-ﬁnd data structure in the following way.

570

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

The additional Union-Find and HighestNode. At each call to Explain, an additional union-ﬁnd
data structure is reset to keep track of the constants that are already equivalent by the proof output
so far. If b and d are in such a situation, any subsequent call to Explain(b, d) does not have to be
processed, since the proof already contains an explanation for this fact. But the situation is more
complicated, since also parts of previous subproofs can be reused, as it happened in Example 16.
There, Explain(h, d) can be seen as the union h=b ∪ Explain(b, d), but since Explain(b, d) is already
part of the output it does not have to be processed. To detect such situations, in this additional
Union-Find, apart from the Find(a) operation, there is also a HighestNode(a) operation, which
returns the highest node among all nodes of the proof tree in the equivalence class of a, that is, the one
which is closest to the root; this highest node is simply stored at the node of Find(a). Maintaining
the HighestNode information will be easy: since only unions of the form Union(a, parent(a)) will
take place, the HighestNode of the new class is always the HighestNode of the second argument of
the call, i.e. the HighestNode of parent(a). Note that this is done using the additional Union-Find.
Finding the nearest common ancestor in the proof forest. As shown in the example, the ﬁrst thing
to do upon a call to Explain(a, b) is to compute the nearest common ancestor of a and b. We consider a NearestCommonAncestor(a,b) operation that retrieves the highest node of the class of the
nearest common ancestor of a and b in the proof forest. When looking for it, as it happens in the
ExplainAlongPath procedure below, one has to jump over whole classes of equivalent constants by
means of the HighestNode operation in order to avoid traversing edges already part of the proof.
Now we can present the two procedures implementing Explain:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Procedure Explain(c1 , c2 )
Set PendingProofs to {c1=c2 }
While PendingProofs is not empty Do
Remove an equation a=b from PendingProofs
c := NearestCommonAncestor(a,b)
ExplainAlongPath(a,c)
ExplainAlongPath(b,c)

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Procedure ExplainAlongPath(a,c)
a := HighestNode(a) /* note that c is already HighestNode(c)
While a  = c Do
b := parent(a) /* in the additional Union-Find */
If edge a → b is labelled with a single input merge a=b
Output a=b
Else /* edge labelled with f(a1 , a2 )=a and f(b1 , b2 )=b */
Output f(a1 , a2 )=a and f(b1 , b2 )=b
Add a1=b1 and a2=b2 to PendingProofs
Union(a, b) /* in the additional Union-Find */
a := HighestNode(b)

5.3. Complexity of Explain
Theorem 17. For an Explain(c1 , c2 ) operation, a k-step proof can be found in time O(k (k, k)).

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

571

Proof . Let k be the number of steps in the ﬁnal proof that is output. There are in total O(k) iterations of the ExplainAlongPath loop since at each iteration either one (line 13) or two (line 15) such
steps are output. In fact, for each call of the form ExplainAlongPath(a,c), the number of iterations
corresponds to the number of different equivalence classes along the path from a to c, and at each
iteration, one union between classes takes place, as well as one call to HighestNode (i.e., one Find).
Hence in total O(k) such classes are merged along the whole proof. The total work done for searching nearest common ancestors (line 5 of procedure Explain) is also O(k), because it can be done
in time linear in the number of classes that are merged in the subsequent two calls ExplainAlongPath(a,c) and ExplainAlongPath(b,c). Furthermore, for each iteration of ExplainAlongPath, at
most two equalities are added to PendingProofs, and hence the loop of procedure Explain is executed O(k) times. Altogether, the global runtime is dominated by the O(k) unions of classes and the O(k)
calls to Find, which has a total cost of O(k (k, k)) in the union-ﬁnd algorithm with path compression. 
For operations of the form Explain(s, t) with arbitrary s and t, one ﬁrst has to Curryfy and
ﬂatten the terms s and t until they have been reduced to constants cs and ct , respectively. For each
replacement of a term f(a1 , a2 ) with a constant a a call to Merge (f(a1 , a2 ), a) is required. Finally a
call Explain(cs , ct ) gives the desired explanation.
Proposition 18. For an Explain(s, t) with s and t arbitrary terms, an additional O(|s| + |t|) time is
required to output a k-step proof.
Proof . It is easy to see that the number of constant introduction and replacements is linear in the
size of the term. Hence we only have to prove that each call Merge (f(a1 , a2 ), a) takes constant time.
If in the algorithm of Section 3.3 Lookup (a , b ) is ⊥, lines 10 and 11 are executed in constant time.
Otherwise, (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b) is added to Pending for some b1 , b2 and b and Propagate is
called. The key point now is to note that the constant a is fresh. This implies that |ClassList (a )| = 1
and hence only one iteration of the ﬁrst loop will be needed. As for the second loop, since a is fresh,
its UseList will be empty and no iteration will be required. 
5.4. Quality of explanations and experimental results
Finding short explanations is good for most practical applications, and also ﬁnding the oldest
explanation (i.e., the one contained in the shortest preﬁx of the sequence E) is desirable (roughly,
because it allows one to do more powerful backjumping). Since our algorithm always returns the
oldest explanation (see the deﬁnition of Explain), from now on we will focus on length.
Example 19. After a given sequence of input equations E, there can be several explanations for an
equation s=t. Consider the sequence of 7 input equations E:
a=b1

b1=b2

b2=b3

b3=c

f(a1 , a1 )=a

f(c1 , c1 )=c

a1=c1

In our algorithm, Explain(a=c) will return the ﬁrst four equations, although the last three equations also form a correct explanation of a=c.
Unfortunately, trying to always ﬁnd the shortest explanation (in number of steps) is too ambitious: given such an E, an equation s=t, and a natural number k, deciding whether an explanation of

572

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

size smaller than k exists for s=t is already an NP-hard problem.4 Therefore, the usual criterion for
quality of an explanation is its irredundancy: after removing any step, it is no longer a valid explanation. Surprisingly, the explanations found by our algorithm as presented in Section 5.3 sometimes
still contain redundant steps.
Example 20. After the sequence of input equations:
a1=b1

a1=c1

f(a1 , a1 )=a

f(b1 , b1 )=b

f(c1 , c1 )=c

the proof forest may consist of the two trees:
a → b ← c and b1 → a1 ← c1
Now Explain(a=c) will return all ﬁve equations. However, the two equations containing b1 are
redundant.
We have run our algorithm as given in the previous subsection over a very large set of benchmarks
(all the EUF examples mentioned in [7], available at the second author’s home page), producing
about 20,000 different proofs. There, on average, explanations have 14.9 steps; redundant explanations are returned in 13.92 percent of the cases, having, on average, 51 steps of which 6 are redundant.
Fortunately, one can easily and efﬁciently post-process explanations in order to fully remove
all redundant steps. On the one hand, it is not very hard to see that one of our explanations can
be redundant only if it contains at least three equations of the same structural class, i.e., of the
form f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b, f(c1 , c2 )=c where ai , bi and ci have the same representative for i
in {1, 2}.
Theorem 21. A call to Explain(a, b) returns a redundant proof only if the proof contains three equations
of the same structural class.
Proof . Any proof P of a=b can be seen as a set of subproofs of the form
x − x1 − x2 − . . . − xn − y
where for some subproof x is a and y is b. Moreover, each step c − d is due to (i) an input equation c=d or (ii) input equations f(c1 , c2 )=c and f(d1 , d2 )=d. In the latter case, P must also contain
subproofs for c1=d1 and c2=d2 .
Let’s take a redundant proof P of a=b and let P  be an irredundant proof such that P  P . There is
at least one subproof x=y where P and P  differ. If all the steps in this subproof of P  appeared in the
proof forest, they would also belong to the corresponding subproof of x=y in P . Hence, there must
be a step c=d in P  not present in the proof forest. Since all steps of type (i) belong to the proof forest,
the step has to be of type (ii), involving input equations f(c1 , c2 )=c and f(d1 , d2 )=d, with c’s and d’s
equivalent in P  . Since P  P , we know that f(c1 , c2 )=c (the same argument holds for f(d1 , d2 )=d)
also appears in P and, analyzing the Explain procedure it can be seen that the proof forest must
include an edge c − e present in P labelled with input equations f(c1 , c2 )=c and f(e1 , e2 )=e, where
ei is equivalent to ci for i in {1, 2}. Hence, f(c1 , c2 )=c, f(d1 , d2 )=d and f(e1 , e2 )=e are equations in P
that belong to the same structural class. 
4 Ashish Tiwari. Personal communication.

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

573

The presence of such equations of the same structural class can be checked in time linear in k,
and is an extremely good ﬁlter: three such equations occur only in 0.13 percent of the irredundant
explanations.
The 14 percent of the explanations marked as “possibly redundant” by this test can be
post-processed as follows in time O(k 2 log k) in order to remove all redundancies: while not
all equations are marked as “necessary”, pick an unmarked one, remove it if the remaining
equations are still a correct explanation (checking this takes O(k log k) time), and otherwise
mark it as “necessary”.
5.5. Proof forests with structural classes as nodes.
We have also implemented a variant of our proof forest where the nodes are these structural classes and hence all edges are labelled with a single input equation between constants. Now, instead
of inserting edges labelled with (f(a1 , a2 )=a, f(b1 , b2 )=b), one merges the two nodes (classes) [...a...]
and [...b...] into a single one.
Example 22. Consider again the input sequence of the previous example
a1=b1

a1=c1

f(a1 , a1 )=a

f(b1 , b1 )=b

f(c1 , c1 )=c

Now the proof forest will consist of the two trees (one of them being a single node):
[a, b, c] and b1 → a1 ← c1
and Explain(a=c) will return only the structural equations involving a and c and the corresponding
recursive explanation that a1=c1 .
In such proof forests, the Explain operation is implemented in a very similar way as before. For
simplicity, in the previous subsection we have not mentioned this improvement, but it is not hard
to see that all results apply.
With this new approach, only 3.3 percent of the explanations are still redundant, having
on average 37 steps, of which 7 are redundant. Using the test, now post-processing is needed
only in 3.83 percent of the cases. By the stronger test given by Theorem 24 below, it might
be possible to remove part of the 0.53 percent of false positives, but this is unlikely to be of
any practical relevance.
Example 23. Let’s see why some redundancies can still appear. Consider
1. f(a1 , a1 )=a 2. f(b1 , b1 )=b 3. f(c1 , c1 )=c 4. f(d1 , d1 )=d
5. a1=b1
6. c1=d1
7. a1=c
8. a1=a

9. d=d1

Then the proof tree may become [a, b] → a1 ← [c, d] ← d1 ← c1
↑
b1
and Explain(b=d1 ) returns the set of all 9 input equations, of which #1 and #8 are redundant. This
redundancy is caused by the two equivalent classes [a, b] and [c, d]. Indeed, it can be shown that
if no two such equivalent non-singleton structural classes exist, proofs will always be irredundant.
But it seems too expensive to maintain that property during the congruence closure procedure;
in particular, the difﬁculties arise when two such classes become equivalent (in the example, after

574

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

d=d1 ) while they are already in the same tree, i.e., when they are already equal by equations between
constants.
Theorem 24. With the structural classes implementation, a call to Explain(a, b) returns a redundant
proof only if it contains two equivalent non-singleton structural classes.
Proof . Again, take a redundant proof P of a=b and let P  be an irredundant proof such that P  P .
We can identify a subproof x=y where P and P  differ. Moreover this subproof in P  is such that it
includes a step c=d of type (ii) not present in the proof forest nor in the corresponding subproof of
P . Let f(c1 , c2 )=c and f(d1 , d2 )=d, with c’s and d’s equivalent in P  , be the input equations involved
in this step. Clearly, c and d do not belong to the same structural class, since the step is not in P .
But, since P  P , we know that f(c1 , c2 )=c (the same argument holds for f(d1 , d2 )=d) appears in
P . If we analyze the Explain procedure it must be the case that P includes a step c − e where
c and e belong to the same structural class and another step d − e with d and e belonging
the same structural class. Hence, c and d belong to two different non-singleton equivalent structural
classes. 
5.6. Explain on non-transformed inputs
Here we show how one can adapt the Explain procedure explained above in order to deal with
sequences of non-Curryﬁed, non-ﬂattened equations. The idea is very simple. Each time the congruence closure procedure receives an equation s=t, it internally applies Curryﬁcation and ﬂattening. In
this process, the terms s ant t will be replaced by constants cs and ct , giving rise to the equation cs=ct .
Due to ﬂattening, several other equations of the form f(a, b)=c will also be generated. Now, the
only modiﬁcation in Explain is that only equations between constants will be output, but replacing
newly introduced constants by the original terms they abstract.

6. Extension to integer offsets
Although the logic of EUF is already very useful for the veriﬁcation of pipelined microprocessors [1], several extensions have been shown to be relevant in practice. In a paper by Bryant, Lahiri,
and Seshia [12], the functions successor (s) and predecessor (p) appear, and all terms are interpreted
as integers. We will show that, surprisingly, all previously presented results can be smoothly extended to support these two interpreted function symbols. Moreover, the same time and space bounds
can still be obtained and very efﬁcient decision procedures are obtained in practice [7].
6.1. Congruence closure with integer offsets
In this section we deal with (conjunctions of positive, as before) input equations built over
free symbols and successor and predecessor. To denote a (sub)term t with k successor symbols
s(. . . s(t) . . .), we write t + k and similarly write t + k with negative k for p(. . . p(t) . . .). This is why
we speak of terms with integer offsets. Given a set of equations E over terms with integer offsets,
the congruence closure with integer offsets of E is the smallest congruence relation  = containing
E and such that

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

575

(1) ∀x p(s(x)) = x
(2) ∀x s(p(x)) = x
(3) ∀x p (p(...p( x )...) = x for all integers n > 0.
  
n

Note that axioms like s(s(x)) = x are not needed: reasoning ad absurdum, if s(s(x))=x then
p (p(s(s(x))))=p (p(x)) which, by (1) implies that x=p (p(x)), contradicting (3). The ﬁrst difference
with the standard congruence closure problem is that conjunctions of positive equations with integer offsets can be unsatisﬁable, that is, the congruence closure with integer offsets does not always
exist.
Example 25. The set { f(a) = c, f(b) = c + 1, a = b } is unsatisﬁable.
However, in spite of this difference, we will show that one can still obtain the same time and space
bounds as for the case with only uninterpreted symbols. The main idea is to extend the notion of
equivalence relation for dealing with equivalences up to offsets:
Example 26. Consider the three equations
a+2=b−3
b−5=c+7
c=d −4

which can equivalently
be written as:

a=b−5
b = c + 12
c=d −4

Here all four constants are equivalent up to some offset. If we take b as the representative of this class,
we can write the other constants with their corresponding offsets with respect to the representative
b in a class list
{ b = a + 5 = c + 12 = d + 8}
thus storing an inﬁnite set of congruence classes, namely the ones represented by . . . , b − 1, b, b +
1, . . . in ﬁnite space.
6.1.1. The initial transformations
The extension to integer offsets does not affect much the process of Curryﬁcation and ﬂattening. Curryﬁcation is only modiﬁed by imposing that for any term t and any integer k we have
Curry(t + k) = Curry(t) + k and ﬂattening is not affected at all.
Example 27. The equation g(a + 1, h(b + 2), b − 2) = b − 1 in Curryﬁed form becomes
f(f(f(g, a + 1), f(h, b + 2)), b − 2) = b − 1
which is ﬂattened into:
f(g, a + 1) = c
f(h, b + 2) = d
f(c, d) = e
f(e, b − 2) = b − 1.

576

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

Note that, due to the fact that the ﬁrst arguments of the “f ” symbol do not represent full
(sub)terms of the original input, after the transformation they will have no integer offsets.
Moreover, this property is preserved during the congruence closure process, because the congruence closure process can only make them equal to other such ﬁrst-argument terms. This fact is
illustrated by the following example.
Example 28. Consider the equations
g(a, a, a) = c Curry
g(b, b, b) = d
⇒
a=b

f(g, a) = g1 f(g, b) = g1
f(f(f(g, a), a), a) = c ﬂat
f(g1 , a) = g2 f(g1 , b) = g2
f(f(f(g, b), b), b) = d
⇒ f(g2 , a) = c f(g2 , b) = d
a=b
a=b

Here the constant g represents a non-existing 0-ary version of g, and g1 represents a term g(a) with a
unary version of g, which of course also does not exist in the input equations; similarly, g2 is g(a, a)
(a non-existing version of g with 2 arguments). During the congruence closure process, when a is
merged with b, the unary, binary and ternary versions of g and g get merged as well. But note that
it is impossible that gi gets merged with gj or with gj , for i = j. Roughly speaking, there is a distinct
sort for each arity.
Altogether, we can assume that no integer offsets will ever appear in the ﬁrst argument of a “f ”
symbol.
6.1.2. The algorithm for integer offsets
In the following, k with possible subscripts will represent concrete integers. Again, our incremental congruence closure algorithm receives a sequence of equations intermixed with questions about
whether two terms s and t are currently congruent. The algorithm stores a set of equations E0 and
supports the following operations:
• Merge (t = c + kc ) : the equation t = c + kc is added to E0 . If E0 is inconsistent, it returns unsatisﬁable. Due to the initial transformations we can assume t to be either a constant or a ﬂat
term of the form f(a, b + kb ).
• AreCongruent?(s, t) : returns "yes" if s and t currently belong to the same congruence class, i.e.,
E0 |= s=t, and “no” otherwise.
The data structures used in this case are similar to the ones used in Section 3.
(1) Pending: a list whose elements are input equations a = b + kb , or pairs of input equations
(f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + k1 , f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) = b + kb ) where a1 and b1 are already congruent, as well
as a2 + ka2 and b2 + kb2 . In both cases, we insert such an element if the merge of the constants
a and b modulo the corresponding offset is pending.
(2) The Representative table: an array indexed by constants, containing for each constant a, the
pair (b, k) such that b is its representative with b = a + k.
(3) The Class lists: for each representative, the list of all pairs (constant, offset) in its class, as in
Example 26.

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

577

(4) The Use lists: for each representative a, UseList (a) is the list of input equations f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) =
b + kb such that a is the representative of b1 or of b2 (or of both).
(5) The Lookup table: for all pairs of representatives (b, c) and constant kc , Lookup (b, c + kc ) is
some input equation f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka such that Representative (a1 ) = (b, 0),
Representative (a2 ) = (c, ka2 − kc ) iff such an equation exists. Otherwise, Lookup (b, c + kc ) is
⊥. Since this would require an inﬁnite three-dimensional table, we store it in a ﬁnite hash table.
(6) The Proof forest: the same structured presented in Section 4. For each input or derived equation a = b + kb it includes an oriented edge a → b or b → a. Note that no offset appears in the
proof forest.
The initialization is adapted as expected from the case without offsets. In the following, for
each constant a, as before we denote its representative constant by a , and now we also write
r(a+ka ) to denote the representative of such a sum, i.e., r(a+ka ) is a +ka −k if Representative (a) =
(a , k). Similarly, the representative of an equation a = b + k is a = b + k  where k  is k + ka − kb if
Representative (a) = (a , ka ) and Representative (b) = (b , kb ).
The algorithm is adapted to support integer offsets as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Procedure Merge(s = t)
If s and t are of the form a and b + kb , respectively Then
add a = b + kb to Pending
return Propagate()
Else /* s = t is of the form f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka */
If Lookup(a1 , r(a2 + ka2 )) is some f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) = b + kb Then
add ( f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka , f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) = b + kb ) to Pending
return Propagate()
Else
set Lookup(a1 , r(a2 + ka2 )) to f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka
add f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka to UseList (a1 ) and to UseList (a2 )
Procedure Propagate()
While Pending is non-empty Do
Remove E of the form a = b + kb or
(f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a + ka , f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) = b + kb ) from Pending
Let a = b + kb be the representative of E
If a  = b and, wlog., |ClassList (a )| ≤ |ClassList (b )| Then
old_repr_a := a
Insert edge a → b labelled with E into the proof forest
For each (c, kc ) in ClassList (old _repr_a ) Do
set Representative (c) to (b , kc − kb )
remove (c, kc ) from ClassList (old _repr_a )
add (c, kc − kb ) to ClassList (b )
For each f(c1 , c2 + kc2 ) = c + kc in UseList (old _repr_a )
If Lookup(c1 , r(c2 + kc2 )) is some f(d1 , d2 + kd2 ) = d + kd Then
add (f(c1 , c2 + kc2 ) = c + kc , f(d1 , d2 + kd2 ) = d + kd ) to Pending
remove f(c1 , c2 + kc2 ) = c + kc from UseList (old _repr_a )
Else

578

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

28.
29.
30.
31.

set Lookup(c1 , r(c2 + kc2 )) to f(c1 , c2 + kc2 ) = c + kc
move f(c1 , c2 + kc2 ) = c + kc from UseList (old _repr_a ) to UseList (b )
Else If a=b and kb  = 0
return unsatisﬁable

Similarly, the AreCongruent?(s, t) procedure follows the same structure as the one in Section 3,
but here Normalize takes the integer offsets into account when normalizing a term. In order to
simplify the presentation, in the procedure Normalize we sometimes identify the pair (a, ka ) with
a + ka .
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

Procedure Normalize(t)
If t is a constant a + ka Then
return r(a + ka )
Else /* t is f(t1 , t2 + kt2 ) */
(u1 , k1 ) :=Normalize(t1 ) /* note that k1 will be zero */
(u2 , k2 ) :=Normalize(t2 + kt2 )
If u1 , u2 are cnts and Lookup(u1 , u2 +k2 ) is f(a1 , a2 +ka2 ) = a+ka Then
return r(a + ka )
Else
return f(u1 , u2 + k2 )

The notions of standard form and of standard congruence extend in the expected way to integer
offsets and the corresponding correctness and runtime analysis results, analogous to Theorems 10
and 9, follow along the same lines.
Theorem 29. A sequence of n Merge operations can be processed in O(n log n) time, and hence each one
of them in O(log n) amortized time. Furthermore, each question AreCongruent?(s, t) can be answered
in O(|s| + |t|) and the space required for the whole sequence is O(n).
Theorem 30. After a set of equations E0 has been processed, for any two terms s and t,
AreCongruent?(s, t) returns “yes” if and only if s=t is in the congruence closure with integer offsets of
E0 .
6.2. Proof-producing congruence closure with integer offsets
The extension of the proof-producing mechanism from the case with no integer offsets is even
simpler. The key point is to note that if a and b are in the same equivalence class, they are equivalent
up to a unique integer offset. Hence there is at most one kb such that a = b + kb holds.
Hence, a call to Explain(a, b + kb ) can always be reduced to Explain(a, b). This way, the algorithm presented in Section 5 needs almost no modiﬁcation. The only thing to be noted is that if
an edge labelled with (f(a1 , a2 + ka2 ) = a+ka , f(b1 , b2 + kb2 ) = b + kb ) is output, the proofs to be
added to PendingProofs do not consider the integer offsets, that is, one simply adds a1=b1 and
a2=b2 .
All the points presented in the case with no integer offsets, such as the possible redundancy of
the proofs, the sufﬁcient conditions for irredundancy or the possibility of working with structural
classes also apply in the presence of integer offsets.

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

579

7. Related work and conclusion
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst congruence closure algorithm able to produce explanations
in time that does not depend on the number of input equations n. Moreover, the congruence closure algorithm itself is not only simple, but it also runs in the best known time, namely O(n log n),
and is indeed very fast in practice. Due to its simplicity and efﬁciency, the algorithms here presented have been implemented in two state-of-the-art SMT solvers such as BarcelogicTools and
MathSAT [20].
We believe that this kind of fundamental algorithmic developments are extremely useful, because
we have seen several less adequate ad-hoc solutions being applied in modern deduction and veriﬁcation tools. This was already mentioned in [5], where the possibility of using a trial-and-error method
for ﬁnding explanations was considered to be impractical. Instead, they proposed extracting explanations from abstract proofs, which, compared to our approach, is asymptotically worse in theory
and produces substantially worse explanations in practice. Another example of this phenomenon is
SRI’s “lemmas-on-demand” approach in the ICS tool: in [3] it is mentioned that “Unfortunately,
current domain-speciﬁc decision procedures lack such a conﬂict explanation facility. Therefore, we
developed an algorithm that calls C-solver O(k × n) times, where k is given, for ﬁnding such an
overapproximation”.
Several authors have attacked the speciﬁc problem of generating explanations in the context of
union-ﬁnd and congruence closure [21–23]. In particular, in the paper “Justifying Equality” [23], for
union-ﬁnd Explain is done in time O(n (n)), i.e., it depends on the number of unions that have taken
place. For the (strict) generalization to congruence closure, this is indeed also the case (although
no concrete bound is given in that paper), and the notion of local irredundancy achieved in [23]
already holds for our basic algorithm of Section 5. Another interesting approach is the one of [24].
There, only the union-ﬁnd case is considered. Proofs are built using assumptions and the axioms
of reﬂexivity, symmetry and transitivity. Given such a proof, it is shown that by means of a term
rewrite system, a minimal proof can be obtained in time O(nlog2 3 ).

References
[1] J.R. Burch, D.L. Dill, Automatic veriﬁcation of pipelined microprocessor control, in: D.L. Dill (Ed.), 6th International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’94, vol. 818 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer,
1994, pp. 68–80.
[2] A. Armando, C. Castellini, E. Giunchiglia, SAT-based procedures for temporal reasoning, in: S. Biundo, M. Fox
(Eds.), 5th European Conference on Planning, ECP’99, vol. 1809 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer,
2000, pp. 97–108.
[3] L. de Moura, H. Rueß, Lemmas on demand for satisﬁability solvers, in: 5th International Conference on Theory and
Applications of Satisﬁability Testing, SAT’02, 2002, pp. 244–251.
[4] G. Audemard, P. Bertoli, A. Cimatti, A. Kornilowicz, R. Sebastiani, A. SAT-based approach for solving formulas over Boolean and Linear Mathematical propositions, in: A. Voronkov (Ed.), 18th International Conference on
Automated Deduction, CADE’02, vol. 2392 of Lecture Notes in Conference Science, Springer, 2002, pp. 195–210.
[5] C. Barrett, D. Dill, A. Stump, Checking satisﬁability of ﬁrst-order formulas by incremental translation into SAT, in:
E. Brinksma, K.G. Larsen (Eds.), 14th International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’02, vol. 2404
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2002, pp. 236–249.

580

R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras / Information and Computation 205 (2007) 557–580

[6] C. Flanagan, R. Joshi, X. Ou, J.B. Saxe, Theorem proving using lazy proof explanation, in: W.A.H. Jr., F. Somenzi (Eds.), 15th International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’03, vol. 2725 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer, 2003, pp. 355–367.
[7] H. Ganzinger, G. Hagen, R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras, C. Tinelli, DPLL(T): fast decision procedures, in: R. Alur, D.
Peled (Eds.), 16th International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’04, vol. 3114 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer, 2004, pp. 175–188.
[8] M. Davis, H. Putnam, A computing procedure for quantiﬁcation theory, Journal of the ACM, J ACM 7 (3) (1960)
201–215.
[9] M. Davis, G. Logemann, D. Loveland, A machine program for theorem-proving, Communications of the ACM,
Commun. ACM 5 (7) (1962) 394–397.
[10] M.W. Moskewicz, C.F. Madigan, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Malik, Chaff: engineering an efﬁcient SAT solver, in: 38th
Design Automation Conference, DAC’01, ACM Press, 2001, pp. 530–535.
[11] C.W. Barrett, L. de Moura, A. Stump, SMT-COMP: satisﬁability modulo theories competition, in: K. Etessami,
S. Rajamani (Eds.), 17th International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’05, vol. 3576 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2005, pp. 20–23.
[12] R.E. Bryant, S.K. Lahiri, S.A. Seshia, Modeling and verifying systems usinga logic of counter arithmetic with lambda expressions and uninterpreted functions, in: E. Brinksma, K.G. Larsen (Eds.), 14th International Conference on
Computer Aided Veriﬁcation, CAV’02, vol. 2404 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2002, pp. 78–92.
[13] T.T. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R.L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 1990.
[14] P.J. Downey, R. Sethi, R.E. Tarjan, Variations on the common subexpressions problem, Journal of the ACM, J ACM
27 (4) (1980) 758–771.
[15] G. Nelson, D.C. Oppen, Fast decision procedures based on congruence closure, Journal of the ACM, J ACM 27 (2)
(1980) 356–364.
[16] R.E. Shostak, An algorithm for reasoning about equality, Communications of the ACM, Commun. ACM 21 (7)
(1978) 583–585.
[17] D. Kapur, Shostak’s congruence closure as completion, in: H. Comon (Ed.), 8th International Conference on Rewriting Techniques and Applications, RTA’97, vol. 1232 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 1997, pp.
23–37.
[18] L. Bachmair, A. Tiwari, Abstract congruence closure and specializations, in: D.A. McAllester (Ed.), 17th International Conference on Automated Deduction, CADE’97, vol. 1831 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer,
2000, pp. 64–78.
[19] R.E. Tarjan, Efﬁciency of a Good but not Linear Set Union Algorithm, Journal of the ACM, J ACM 22 (2) (1975)
215–225.
[20] M. Bozzano, R. Bruttomesso, A. Cimatti, T. Junttila, P. van Rossum, S. Schulz, R. Sebastiani, The MathSAT 3
system., in: R. Nieuwenhuis (Ed.), 20th International Conference on Automated Deduction, CADE’05, vol. 3632 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2005, pp. 315–321.
[21] A. Stump, D.L. Dill, Generating proofs from a decision procedure, in: A. Pnueli, P. Traverso (Eds.), Proceedings of
the FLoC Workshop on Run-Time Result Veriﬁcation, 1999.
[22] R. Klapper, A. Stump, Validated proof-producing decision procedures, in: 2nd Workshop on Pragmatics of Decision
Procedures in Automated Reasoning, PDPAR’04, Cork, Ireland, 2004.
[23] L. de Moura, H. Rueß, N. Shankar, Justifying equality, in: 2nd Workshop on Pragmatics of Decision Procedures in
Automated Reasoning, PDPAR’04, Cork, Ireland, 2004.
[24] A. Stump, L. Tan, The Algebra of equality proofs, in: J. Giesl (Ed.), 16th International Conference on Term Rewriting
and Applications, RTA’05, vol. 3467 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2005, pp. 469–483.

