arXiv:1405.4256v1 [cs.PL] 16 May 2014

To appear in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming (TPLP)

1

Resource Usage Analysis of Logic Programs
via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types ∗
A. SERRANO1 †

P. LOPEZ-GARCIA2,3

M. V. HERMENEGILDO3,4

1 Dept. of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University

(e-mail: A.SerranoMena@uu.nl)
2 IMDEA Software Institute
(e-mail: pedro.lopez@imdea.org, manuel.hermenegildo@imdea.org)
3 Spanish Council for Scientific Research (CSIC)
4 Technical University of Madrid (UPM)
(e-mail: herme@fi.upm.es)

Abstract
We present a novel general resource analysis for logic programs based on sized types. Sized types
are representations that incorporate structural (shape) information and allow expressing both
lower and upper bounds on the size of a set of terms and their subterms at any position and
depth. They also allow relating the sizes of terms and subterms occurring at different argument
positions in logic predicates. Using these sized types, the resource analysis can infer both lower
and upper bounds on the resources used by all the procedures in a program as functions on input
term (and subterm) sizes, overcoming limitations of existing resource analyses and enhancing
their precision. Our new resource analysis has been developed within the abstract interpretation
framework, as an extension of the sized types abstract domain, and has been integrated into
the Ciao preprocessor, CiaoPP. The abstract domain operations are integrated with the setting
up and solving of recurrence equations for inferring both size and resource usage functions. We
show that the analysis is an improvement over the previous resource analysis present in CiaoPP
and compares well in power to state of the art systems.

1 Introduction
Resource usage analysis infers the aggregation of some numerical properties (named
resources), like memory usage, time spent in computation, or bytes sent over a wire,
throughout the execution of a piece of code. The expressions giving the usage of resources
are usually functions of the sizes of some input arguments to procedures.
Our starting point is the methodology outlined by
(Debray et al. 1990; Debray and Lin 1993; Debray et al. 1997), characterized by the setting up of recurrence equations. In that methodology, the size analysis is the first of
several other analysis steps that include, e.g., cardinality analysis (that infers lower and
upper bounds on the number of solutions computed by a predicate), and which ultimately
obtain the resource usage bounds. One drawback of these proposals, as well as most of
their subsequent derivatives, is that they are able to cope with size information about
∗ This research was supported in part by projects EU FP7 318337 ENTRA, Spanish MINECO TIN201239391 StrongSoft and TIN2008-05624 DOVES, and Madrid TIC/1465 PROMETIDOS-CM.
† A. Serrano performed this work during his former affiliation to the IMDEA Software Institute.

2

A. Serrano et al.

subterms in a very limited way. This is an important limitation, which causes the analysis
to infer trivial bounds for a large class of programs. For example, consider a predicate
which computes the factorials of a list:
% listfact (+ L , - FL ).
listfact ([] ,
[]).
listfact ([ E | R ] ,[ F | FR ]) : fact (E , F ) ,
listfact (R , FR ).

% fact (+ N , -F ).
fact (0 ,1).
fact (N , M ) : - N1 is N - 1 ,
fact ( N1 , M1 ) ,
M is N * M1 .

Intuitively, the best bound for the running time of this program for a list L is c1 +
P
e∈L (c2 + timef act (e)), where c1 and c2 are constants related to unification and calling
costs. But with no further information, the upper bound for the elements of L must
be ∞ to be on the safe side, and then the returned overall time bound must also be
∞. In a previous paper (Serrano et al. 2013) we focused on a proposal to improve the
size analysis based on sized types. While in that paper we already hinted at the fact
that the application of our sized types in resource analysis could result in considerable
improvement, no description was provided of the actual resource analysis. This paper
is complementary and fills this gap by describing a new resource usage analysis that
can take advantage of the new information contained in sized types. Furthermore, the
resource analysis we propose is based fully on abstract interpretation. Previously, the auxiliary analyses used this technique, but the core resource analysis did not use it directly.
Our approach formulates the resource analysis as an abstract domain that can be integrated within a standard, parametric abstract interpreter. In particular, we integrate it
into the PLAI abstract interpretation framework (Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1992;
Puebla and Hermenegildo 1996) of CiaoPP, obtaining features such as multivariance, efficient fixpoints, and assertion-based verification and user interaction for free. We also
perform an assessment of the accuracy and efficiency of the resulting overall system.
In Section 2 we give a high-level view of the approach. In the following section we
review the abstract interpretation approach to size analysis using sized types. Section 4
gets deeper into the resource usage analysis, our main contribution. Experimental results
are shown in Section 5. Finally we review some related work and discuss future directions.

2 Overview of the Approach
We give now an overview of our approach to resource usage analysis, and present the
main ideas in our proposal using the classical append/3 predicate as a running example:
append ([] ,
S , S ).
append ([ E | R ] , S , [ E | T ]) : - append (R , S , T ).

The process starts by performing the regular type analysis present in the CiaoPP system (Vaucheret and Bueno 2002). In our example, the system infers that for any call to
the predicate append(X, Y, Z) with X and Y bound to lists of numbers and Z a free
variable, if the call succeeds, then Z also gets bound to a list of numbers. The set of “list
of numbers” is represented by the regular type listnum, defined as follows:
l i s t n u m := [] | [ num | l i s t n u m ].

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

3

From this regular type definition, sized type schemas are derived. The sized type
schema listnum-s is derived from listnum. This schema corresponds to a list whose
length is between α and β, containing numbers between γ and δ.
listnum-s → listnum(α,β)(num(γ,δ) )
From now on, in the examples we will use ln and n instead of listnum and num for
the sake of conciseness. The next phase involves relating the sized types of the different
arguments to the append/3 predicate using recurrence (in)equations. Let sizeX denote
the sized type schema for argument X in a call append(X, Y, Z) (from the regular
type inferred by a previous analysis). We have that sizeX denotes ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ).
Similarly, the sized type schema for the output argument Z is ln(αZ ,βZ ) (n(γZ ,δZ ) ), denoted
by sizeZ . We are interested in expressing bounds on the length of the output list Z and
the values of its elements as a function of size bounds for the input lists X and Y (and their
elements). For this, we set up a system of inequations. For instance, the inequations that
are set up to express a lower bound on the length of the output argument Z, denoted αZ ,
as a function on the size bounds of the input arguments X and Y, and their subarguments
(αX , βX , γX , δX , αY , βY , γY , and δY ) are:

 

αY
αX , βX , γX , δX ,
≥
αZ
αY , βY , γY , δY

1 + αZ

if αX = 0
!
αX − 1, βX − 1, γX , δX ,
αY , βY , γY , δY

if αX > 0

Note that in the recurrence inequation set up for the second clause of append/3, the
expression αX − 1 (respectively βX − 1) represents the size relationship that a lower
(respectively upper) bound on the length of the list in the first argument of the recursive
call to append/3 is one unit less than the length of the first argument in the clause head.
As the number of size variables grows, the set of inequations becomes too large. Thus,
we propose a compact representation, which allows us to grasp all the relations in one
view. The first change in our proposal is to write the parameters to size functions directly
as sized types. Now, the parameters to the αZ function are the sized type schemas
corresponding to the arguments X and Y of the append/3 predicate:

 (α ,β ) (γ ,δ )  
αY
ln X X (n X X )
≥
αZ

ln(αY ,βY ) (n(γY ,δY ) )
1 + αZ

if αX = 0
(αX −1,βX −1)

ln

(γX ,δX )

(n
)
ln(αY ,βY ) (n(γY ,δY ) )

!

if αX > 0

In a second step, we group together all the inequalities of a single sized type. As we
always alternate lower and upper bounds, it is always possible to distinguish the type
of each inequality. We do not write equalities, so that we do not use the symbol =.
However, we always write inequalities of both signs (≥ and ≤) for each size function,
since we compute both lower and upper size bounds. Troughout this paper we use a
representation using ≶ for the symbols ≥ and ≤ that are always paired. For example,
the expression ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ) ≶ ln(e1 ,e2 ) (n(e3 ,e4 ) ) represents the conjunction of the
following size constraints: αX ≥ e1 , βX ≤ e2 , γX ≥ e3 , δX ≤ e4 . In the implementation,
constraints for each variable are kept apart and solved separatedly.
After setting up the corresponding system of inequations for the output argument Z
of append/3, and solving it, we obtain the following expression:

4

A. Serrano et al.

sizeZ (sizeX , sizeY ) ≶ ln(αX +αY ,βX +βY ) (n(min(γX ,γY ),max(δX ,δY )) )

that represents, among others, the relation αz ≥ αX +αY (resp. βz ≤ βX +βY ), expressing
that a lower (resp. upper) bound on the length of the output list Z, denoted αz (resp.
βz ), is the addition of the lower (resp. upper) bounds on the lengths of X and Y. It also
represents the relation γZ ≥ min(γX , γY ) (resp. δZ ≤ max(δX , δY )), which expresses that
a lower (resp. upper) bound on the size of the elements of the list Z, denoted γz (resp.
δz ), is the minimum (resp. maximum) of the lower (resp. upper) bounds on the sizes of
the elements of the input lists X and Y.
Resource analysis builds upon the sized type analysis and adds recurrence equations
for each resource we want to analyze. Apart from that, when considering logic programs,
we have to take into account that they can fail or have multiple solutions when executed,
so we need an auxiliary cardinality analysis to get correct results.
Let us focus on cardinality analysis. Let sL and sU denote lower and upper bounds on
the number of solutions for append/3. Following the program structure we can infer:


sL ln(0,0) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY


sL ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY


sU ln(0,0) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY


sU ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY

≥

1

≥



sL ln(αX −1,βX −1) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY

≤

1

≤



sU ln(αX −1,βX −1) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY

Since sL ≤ sU , the solution to these inequations must be (sL , sU ) = (1, 1). Thus, we have
inferred that append/3 has at least (and at most) one solution: it behaves like a function.
When setting up the equations, we use the result of the non-failure analysis to see that
append/3 cannot fail when given lists as arguments. If not, the lower bound is 0.
Now we move forward to analyzing the number of resolution steps performed by a call
to append/3 (we will only focus on upper bounds, rU , for brevity). For the first clause,
we know that only one resolution step is needed, so:


rU ln(0,0) (n(γX ,δX ) ), ln(αY ,βY ) (n(γY ,δY ) ) ≤ 1

The second clause performs one resolution step plus all the resolution steps performed
by all possible backtrackings over the call in the body of the clause. This number can be
bounded as a function of the number of solutions. Thus, the equation reads:


rU ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY

≤

1

+
×

=

1

+



sU ln(αX −1,βX −1) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY


rU ln(αX −1,βX −1) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY


rU ln(αX −1,βX −1) (n(γX ,δX ) ), sizeY

Solving these equations we infer that an upper bound on the number of resolution steps
is the (upper bound on) the length of the input list X plus one. This is expressed as:


rU ln(αX ,βX ) (n(γX ,δX ) ), ln(αY ,βY ) (n(γY ,δY ) ) ≤ βX + 1

3 Sized Types Review

As shown in the append example, the variables that we relate in our inequations come
from sized types, which are ultimately derived from the regular types previously inferred

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

5

for the program. Among several representations of regular types used in the literature,
we use one based on regular term grammars, equivalent to (Dart and Zobel 1992) but
with some adaptations. A type term is either a base type ηi (taken from a finite set), a
type symbol τi (taken from an infinite set), or a term of the form f (φ1 , . . . , φn ), where
f is a n-ary function symbol (taken from an infinite set) and φ1 , . . . , φn are type terms.
A type rule has the form τ → φ, where τ is a type symbol and φ a type term. A regular
term grammar Υ is a set of type rules.
To devise the abstract domain we focus specifically on the PLAI
(Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1989; Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1992) framework,
integrated within CiaoPP(Hermenegildo et al. 2012) (see Appendix A), where we have
incorporated our implementation. The PLAI algorithm abstracts execution and-or trees
similarly to (Bruynooghe 1991) but represents the abstract executions implicitly and
computes fixpoints efficiently using memo tables, dependency tracking, etc. It takes as
input a pair (L, λc ) representing an entry point (predicate) along with an abstraction
of the call patterns (in the chosen abstract domain) and produces an abstraction which
overapproximates information at all program points (for all procedure versions).
The formal concept of sized type is an abstraction of a set of Herbrand terms which are
a subset of some regular type τ and meet some lower- and upper-bound size constraints
on the number of type rule applications needed to generate the terms. A grammar for
the new sized types follows:
sized-type

bounds
sized-args
sized-arg
position

::=
|
|
::=
::=
::=
::=

η bounds
τ bounds (sized-args)
τ (sized-args)
nob | (n, m)
ǫ | sized-arg, sized-args
sized-typeposition
ǫ | hf, ni

η base type
τ recursive type symbol
τ non-recursive type symbol
n, m ∈ N, m ≥ n

f functor, 0 ≤ n ≤ arity of f

However, in our abstract domain we need to refer to sets of sized types which satisfy
certain constraints on their bounds. For that purpose, we introduce sized type schemas:
a schema is just a sized type with variables in bound positions, i.e., where n and m in the
pair (n, m) defining the symbol bounds in the grammar above are variables (called bound
variables), along with a set of constraints over those variables. We call such variables
bound variables. We will denote sized(τ ) the sized type schema corresponding to a regular
type τ where all the bound variables are fresh.
The full abstract domain is an extension of sized type schemas to several predicate
variables. Each abstract element is a triple ht, d, ri such that:
1. t is a set of v → (sized(τ ), c), where v is a variable, τ its regular type and c is its
classification. Subgoal variables can be classified as output, relevant, or irrelevant.
Variables appearing in the clause body but not in the head are classified as clausal ;
2. d (the domain) is a set of constraints over the relevant variables;
3. r (the relations) is a set of relations among bound variables.
For example, the final abstract elements corresponding to the clauses of the listfact
example can be found below. The equations have already been normalized into their
simplest form, and the variables refer to the predicate arguments in normal form. listf act

6

A. Serrano et al.

refers implicitly to the solution of the joint equations: it is the recurrence we need to solve.
In order to enhance readability, we have dropped the position element h., 1i from ln.
λ′1 =

o +
* n
L → (ln(α1 ,β1 ) (n(γ1 ,δ1 ) ), rel.), F L → (ln(α2 ,β2 ) (n(γ2 ,δ2 ) ), out.)
{α1 = 1, β1 = 1}, {ln(α2 ,β2 ) (n(γ2 ,δ2 ) ) ≶ ln(1,1) (nnob )}



(α ,β )
(γ ,δ )
(α ,β )
(γ ,δ )
 L → (ln 1 1 (n 1 1 ), rel.), F L → (ln 2 2 (n 2 2 ), out.), 
E → (n(γ3 ,δ3 ) , cl.), R → (ln(α4 ,β4 ) (n(γ4 ,δ4 ) ), cl.),
* 
 +
F → (n(γ5 ,δ5 ) , cl.), F R → (ln(α6 ,β6 ) (n(γ6 ,δ6 ) ), cl.)
′
λ2 =
{α1 > 0, β1 > 0},
(
)
′
′
′
′
ln(α2 ,β2 ) (n(γ2 ,δ2 ) ) ≶ ln(α +1,β +1) (n(min(γ1 !,γ ),max(δ1 !,δ) )
′

′

′

′

ln(α ,β ) (n(γ ,δ ) ) ≶ listf act ln(α1 −1,β1 −1) (n(γ1 ,δ1 ) )

4 The Resources Abstract Domain
We take advantage of the added power of sized types to develop a better resource analysis
which infers upper and lower bounds on the amount of resources used by each predicate
as a function of the sized type schemas of the input arguments (which encode the sizes of
the terms and subterms appearing in such input arguments). For this reason, the novel
abstract domain for resource analysis that we have developed is tightly integrated with
the sized types abstract domain. Following (Navas et al. 2007), we account for two places
where the resource usage can be abstracted:
• When entering a clause: some resources may be needed during unification of the
call (subgoal) and the clause head, the preparation of entering that clause, and
any work done when all the literals of the clause have been processed. This cost,
dependent on the head h, is called head cost, ϕ(h).
• Before calling a literal q: some resources may be used to prepare a call to a body
literal (e.g., constructing the actual arguments). The amount of these resources is
known as literal cost and is represented by ω(q).
We first consider the case of estimating upper bounds on resource usages. For simplicity,
assume first that we deal with predicates having a behavior that is close to functional
or imperative programs, i.e., that are deterministic and do not fail. Then, we can bound
the resource consumption of a clause C ≡ p(x̄) : − q1 (x̄1 ), . . . , qn (x̄n ), denoted rU,clause :
Pn
rU,clause (C) ≤ ϕ(p(x̄)) + i=1 (ω(qi (x̄i )) + rU,pred (qi (x̄i )))
As in sized type analysis, the sizes of some input arguments may be explicitly computed, or, otherwise, we express them by using a generic expression, giving rise (in the
case of recursive clauses) to a recurrence equation that we need to solve in order to find
closed form resource usage functions.
The resource usage of a predicate, rU,pred , depending on its input data sizes, is obtained
from the resource usage of the clauses defining it, by taking the maximum of the equation
expressions that meet the constraints on the input data sizes (i.e., have the same domain).
In addition, we need to deal with two extra features of logic programming:
• We may execute a literal more than once on backtracking. To bound the number
of times a literal is executed, we need to know the number of solutions each literal
(to its left) can generate. Using the information provided by cardinality analysis,

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

7

the number of times a literal is executed is at most the product of the upper bound
on the number of solutions, sU , of all the previous literals in the clause. We get:
rU,clause (p(x̄) : − q1 (x̄
), . . . , qn (x̄n ))
1Q

P
i−1
≤ ϕ(p(x̄)) + n
i=1
j=1 spred (qj (x̄j )) (ω(qi (x̄i )) + rU,pred (qi (x̄i )))

• Also, in logic programming more than one clause may unify with a given subgoal. In
that case it is incorrect to take the maximum of the resource usages of each clause
when setting up the recurrence equations (whereas this was valid in size analysis).
A correct solution is to take the sum of every set of equations with a common
domain, but the bound becomes then very rough. Finer-grained possibilities can
be considered by using different aggregation procedures per resource.
Lower bounds analysis is similar, but needs to take into account the possibility of
failure, which stops clause execution and forces backtracking. Basically, no resource usage
should be added beyond the point where failure may happen. For this reason, in our
implementation we use the non-failure analysis already present in CiaoPP. Also, the
aggregation of clauses with a common domain must be different to that used in the upper
bounds case. The simplest solution is to just take the minimum of the clauses. However,
this again leads to very rough bounds. We will discuss lower bound aggregation later.
Cardinality Analysis. We have already discussed why cardinality analysis (which estimates bounds on the number of solutions) is instrumental in resource analysis of logic
programs. We can consider the number of solutions as another resource, but, due to its
importance, we treat it separately.
An upper bound on the number of solutions of a single clause could be gathered by
multiplying the number of solutions of its body literals:
Qn
sU,clause (p(x̄) : − q1 (x̄1 ), . . . , qn (x̄n )) ≤ i=1 sU,pred (qi (x̄i ))
For aggregation we need to add the equations with a common domain, to get a recurrence
equation system. These equations will be solved later to get a closed form function giving
an upper bound on the number of solutions.
It is important to remark that many improvements can be added to this simple cardinality analysis to make it more precise. Some of them are discussed in (Debray and Lin 1993),
like maintaining separate bounds for the relation defined by the predicate and the number
of solutions for a particular input, or dealing with mutually exclusive clauses by performing the max operation, instead of the addition operation when aggregating. However, our
focus here is the definition of an abstract domain, and see whether a simple definition
produces comparable results for the resource usage analysis.
One of the improvements we decided to include is the use of the determinacy analysis
present in CiaoPP (López-Garcı́a et al. 2010). If such analysis infers that a predicate is
deterministic, we can safely set the upper bound for the number of solutions to 1.
In the case of lower bounds, we need to know for each clause whether it may fail or not.
For that reason we use the non-failure analysis already present in CiaoPP (Bueno et al. 2004).
In case of a possible failure, the lower bound on cardinality is set to 0.
The Abstract Elements. Within the PLAI abstract interpretation framework
(Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1992; Puebla and Hermenegildo 1996) an analysis is de-

8

A. Serrano et al.

fined by the abstract elements involved in it and a set of operations. We refer the reader
to the Appendix A for an overview of the overall framework. In our case, the abstract
elements are derived from sized type analysis by adding some extra components. In particular:
1. The current variable for solutions, and current variable for each resource.
2. A boolean element for telling whether we have already found a failing literal.
3. An abstract element from the non-failure domain.
4. An abstract element encoding information about determinacy.
We will denote the abstract elements by h(sL , sU ), vresources , f ailed?, d, r, nf, deti where
(sL , sU ) are the lower and upper bound variables for the number of solutions, vresources
is a set of pairs (rL , rU ) giving the lower and upper bound variables for each resource,
f ailed? is a boolean element (true or false), d and r are defined as in the sized type
abstract domain, and nf and det can take values not fails/fails and non det/is det
respectively, as explained in (López-Garcı́a et al. 2010; Bueno et al. 2004). Appendix B
gives some more details of the domain.
We assume that we are given the definition of a set of resources, which are fixed
throughout the whole analysis process. We assume that for each resource r we have: its
head cost, ϕr , which takes a clause head as parameter; its literal cost, ωr , which takes
a literal as parameter; its aggregation procedure, Γr , which takes the equations for each
of the clauses and creates a new set of recurrence equations from them; and the default
upper ⊥r,U and lower ⊥r,L bound on resource usage.
To better understand how the domain works, we will continue with the analysis of
listfact that we started in the previous section. We assume that the only resource to
be analyzed is the “number of resolution steps,” which uses the following parameters:
ϕ = 1,

ω = 0,

Γr = +,

(⊥L , ⊥U ) = (0, 0)

The ⊑, ⊔ Operations and the ⊥ Element. We do not have a decidable definition for
⊑ or ⊔, because there is no general algorithm for checking the inclusion or union of sets
of integers defined by recurrence relations. Instead, for the inequation components we
just check whether one is a subset of another one, up to variable renaming, or perform a
syntactic union of the inequations. The ordering is finished by taking the product order
with the non-failure and determinacy parts. This is enough for having a correct analysis.
For the bottom element, ⊥, we first generate new variables for each of the resources and
the solution. Then, we add relations between them and the default cost for each resource.
For an unknown predicate, the number of solutions should be [0, ∞) and it may fail. For
example, the bottom element for the “number of resolution steps” resource will be:
h(sL , sU ), {(nL , nU )}, true, ∅, {(sL , sU ) ≶ (0, ∞), (nL , nU ) ≶ (0, 0)}, fails, non deti
where fails and non det are the bottom elements of their respective domains.
The λcall to βentry Operation. In this operation we need to create the initial structures
for handling the bounds on the number of solutions and resources. This implies the
generation of fresh variables for each of them, and setting them to their initial values. In
the case of the number of solutions, the initial value is 1 (which is the number of solutions
generated by a fact). For a resource r, the initial value is exactly ϕr . We will name new

9

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

fresh variables by adding an integer subscript. For example, sL,1,1 will be the first fresh
variable related to the l ower bound on solutions on first clause.
The addition of constraints over sized types when the head arguments are partially
instantiated is inherited from the sized types domain. Finally, for the f ailed? component,
we should start with value false, as no literal has been executed yet, so it cannot fail.
In the listfact example, the entry substitutions are:
βentry,1 =



(sL,1,1 , sU,1,1 ), {(nL,1,1 , nU,1,1 )}, false, {α1 = 0, β1 = 0},
{(sL,1,1 , sU,1,1 ) ≶ (1, 1), (nL,1,1 , nU,1,1 ) ≶ (1, 1)}, not fails, is det



βentry,2 =



(sL,2,1 , sU,2,1 ), {(nL,2,1 , nU,2,1 )}, false, {α1 > 0, β1 > 0},
{(sL,2,1 , sU,2,1 ) ≶ (1, 1), (nL,2,1 , nU,2,1 ) ≶ (1, 1)}, not fails, is det



The Extend Operation. In the extend operation we get both the current abstract substitution and the substitution from the literal call. We need to update several components
of the abstract element. First of all, we need to include a call to the function giving the
number of solutions and the resource usage from the called literal.
Afterwards, we need to generate new variables for the number of solutions and resources, which will hold the bounds for the clause up to that point. New relations must
be added to the abstract element to give a value to those new variables:
• For the number of solutions, let sU,c be the new upper bound variable, sU,p the
previous variable defining an upper bound on the number of solutions, and sU,λ an
upper bound on the number of solutions for the subgoal. Then we need to include
a constraint: sU,c ≤ sU,p × sU,λ .
In the case of lower bound analysis, there are two phases. First of all, we check
whether the called literal can fail, looking at the output of the non-failure analysis. If
it is possible for it to fail, we update the f ailed? component of the abstract element
to true. If after this checking the f ailed? component is still false (meaning that
neither this literal nor any of the previous ones may fail) we include a relation
similar to the one for the upper bound case: sL,c ≥ sL,p × sL,λ . Otherwise, we
include the relation sL,c ≥ 0, because failing predicates produce no solutions.
• The approach for resources is similar. Let rU,c be the new upper bound variable,
rU,p the previous variable defining an upper bound on that resource and rU,λ an
upper bound on resources from the analysis of the literal. The relation added in
this case is rU,c ≤ rU,p + sU,p × (ω + rU,λ ).
For lower bounds, we have already updated the f ailed? component, so we only
have to work in consequence. If the component is still false, we add a new relation
similar to the one for upper bounds. If it is true, it means that failure may happen
at some point, so we do not have to add that resource any more. Thus the relation
to be included is rL,c ≥ rL,p .
In our example, consider the extension of listfact after performing the analysis of the
fact literal, whose resource components of the abstract element will be:


(sL , sU ), {(nL , nU )}, false, {α, β ≥ 0}
{(sL , sU ) ≶ (1, 1), (nL , nU ) ≶ (α, β)}, not fails, is det



This literal is known not to fail, so we do not change the value of f ailed? in our abstract
element for the second clause. That means that it is still false, so we add complete calls:

10

A. Serrano et al.

βentry,2 =

(sL,2,2 , sU,2,2 ), {(nL,2,2 , nU,2,2 )}, false, {. . . }
+
...,

,
(sL,2,2 , sU,2,2 ) ≶ (1 × sL,2,1 , 1 × sU,2,1 ),


(nL,2,2 , nU,2,2 ) ≶ (γ1 + nL,2,1 , δ1 + nU,2,1 )
not fails, is det

* 


The βexit to λ′ Operation. After all the extend operations, the variables appearing
in the number of solutions and resources positions will hold the correct value for their
properties. As we did with sized types, we follow now a normalization step, based on
(Debray and Lin 1993): replace each variable appearing in an expression with its definition in terms of other variables, in reverse topological order. Following this process, we
should reach the variables in the sized types of the input parameters in the head.
Going back to listfact, the final substitutions are as follows. s′L , s′U , n′L and n′U refer
to number of solutions and resolution steps from the recursive call to listfact.
λ′1 =



(sL,1,1 , sU,1,1 ), {(nL,1,1 , nU,1,1 )}, false, {α1 = 0, β1 = 0},
{(sL,1,1 , sU,1,1 ) ≶ (1, 1), (nL,1,1 , nU,1,1 ) ≶ (1, 1)}, not fails, is det

λ′entry,2 =

*



(sL,2,3 , sU,2,3 ), {(nL,2,3 , nU,2,3 )}, false, {α1 > 0, β1 > 0},


′
(α1 −1,β1 −1)
(γ1 ,δ1 )

+

 sL,2,3 ≥ 1 × s′L (ln(α −1,β −1)(n(γ ,δ ))), 


1
sU,2,3 ≤ 1 × sU (ln 1
(n 1 1 )),
,

 nL,2,3 ≥ γ1 + n′L (ln(α1 −1,β1 −1) (n(γ1 ,δ1 ) )), 



nU,2,3 ≤ δ1 + n′U (ln(α1 −1,β1 −1) (n(γ1 ,δ1 ) ))
not fails, is det

The Widening Operator ∇ and Closed Forms. As mentioned before, in contrast
to previous cost analyses, at this point we bring in the possibility of different aggregation
operators. Thus, when we have the equations, we need to pass them to each of the
corresponding Γr per each resource r to get the final equations.
This process can be further refined in the case of solution analysis, using the information from the non-failure and determinacy analyses. If the final output of the non-failure
analysis is fails, we know that the only correct lower bound is 0. So we can just assign
the relation sL ≥ 0 without further relations. Conversely, if the final output of the determinacy analysis is is det, we can safely set the relation sU ≤ 1, because at most one
solution will be produced in each case. Furthermore, we can refine the lower bound on
the number of solutions with the minimum between the current bound and 1.
In the example analyzed above there was an implicit assumption while setting up the
relations: that the recursive call in the body of listfact refers to the same predicate
call, so we can set up a recurrence. This fact is implicitly assumed in Hindley-Milner type
systems. But in logic programming it is usual for a predicate to be called with different
patterns (for example, modes). Fortunately, the CiaoPP framework allows multivariance
(support for different call patterns of the same predicate). For the analysis to handle it,
we cannot just add calls with the bare name of the predicate, because it will conflate all
the versions. The solution is to add a new component to the abstract element: a random
name given to the specific instance of the predicate, and generated in the λcall to βentry .
In the widening step, all different versions of the same predicate are conflated.
Even though the analysis works with relations, these are not as useful as functions
defined without recursion or calls to other functions. First of all, developers will get a
better idea of the sizes presented in such a closed form. Second, functions are amenable

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

11

Table 1. Experimental results.
Program

append
appendAll2
coupled
dyade
erathos
fib
hanoi
isort
isortlist
listfact
listnum
minsort
nub
partition
zip3

Resource A. (LB)
New
Prev.
α
a1 a2 a3
µ
α1 α2
α
φµ
1
α2
a21
αγ
µ
α2
a1
α
min(αi )

α
a1
0
α1 α2
α
φµ
0
α2
a21
α
µ
α
a1
α
0

=
+
+
=
=
=
+
=
=
+
=
+
=
=
+

New
β
b1 b2 b3
ν
β1 β2
β2
φν
2ν
β2
b21 b2
βδ
ν
β2
b21 b2
β
min(βi )

Resource A. (UB)
Prev.
RAML
β
∞
∞
β1 β2
β2
φν
∞
β2
∞
∞
ν
β2
∞
β
∞

=
+
+
=
=
=
+
=
+
+
=
=
+
=
+

β
b1 b2 b3
ν
β1 β2
β2
infeasible
infeasible
β2
b21 b2
unknown
unknown
β2
b21 b2
β
β3

A. Times (s)
New
Prev.
=
=
=
=
=
+
+
=
=
?
?
=
=
=
+

0.999
2.408
1.365
1.658
2.251
1.064
0.819
1.675
2.546
1.387
1.189
1.938
3.614
1.698
2.484

0.530
0.668
0.644
0.620
0.772
0.671
0.603
0.617
0.669
0.644
0.581
0.671
0.910
0.647
0.570

to comparison as outlined in (López-Garcı́a et al. 2010), which is essential in verification.
There are several packages able to get bounds for recurrence equations: computer algebra
systems, such as Mathematica (which has been used in our experiments) or Maxima; and
specialized solvers such as PURRS (Bagnara et al. 2005) or PUBS (Albert et al. 2011).
In our implementation we apply this overapproximation operator after each widening.
For our example, the final abstract substitution is:
λ′1 ∇λ′2 =



(sL , sU ), {(nL , nU )}, false, {α1 , β1 ≥ 0},
{(sL , sU ) ≶ (1, 1), (nL , nU ) ≶ (α1 γ1 , β1 δ1 )} , not fails, is det



5 Experimental Results
We have constructed a prototype implementation in Ciao by defining the abstract operations for sized type and resource analysis that we have described and plugging them into
CiaoPP’s PLAI. Our objective is to assess the gains in precision in resource analysis.
Table 1 shows the results of the comparison between the new lower (LB) and upper
bound (UB) resource analyses implemented in CiaoPP, which also use the new size analysis (columns New ), and the previous resource analyses in CiaoPP (Debray and Lin 1993;
Debray et al. 1997; Navas et al. 2007) (columns Prev.). We also compare (for upper bounds)
with RAML (Hoffmann et al. 2012). Although the new resource analysis and the previous one infer concrete resource usage bound functions, for the sake of conciseness and
to make the comparison with RAML meaningful, Table 1 only shows the complexity
orders of such functions, e.g., if the analysis infers the resource usage bound function Φ,
and Φ ∈ Θ(Ψ), Table 1 shows Ψ. The parameters of such functions are (lower or upper)
bounds on input data sizes. The symbols used to name such parameters have been chosen assuming that lists of numbers Li have size ln(αi ,βi ) (n(γi ,δi ) ), lists of lists of lists of
numbers have size llln(a1 ,b1 ) (lln(a2 ,b2 ) (ln(a3 ,b3 ) (n(a4 ,b4 ) ))), and numbers have size n(µ,ν) .
The calling modes are the usual ones with the last argument as output.
Table 1 includes columns with symbols summarizing whether the new CiaoPP resource

12

A. Serrano et al.

analysis improves on the previous one and RAML’s: + (resp. −) indicates more (resp.
less) precise bounds, and = the same. The new resource analysis improves on CiaoPP’s
previous analysis. Moreover, RAML can only infer polynomial costs, while our approach
is able to infer other types of functions, as shown for the divide-and-conquer benchmarks hanoi and fib, which represent a common class of programs. For predicates with
polynomial cost, we get equal or better results than RAML.
The last two columns show the times (in seconds) required by both lower and upper
bound analysis together for the new resource analysis, and for the previous resource
analysis in CiaoPP (Ciao/CiaoPP version 1.15-2124-ga588643, on an Intel Core i7 2.4
GHz, 8 GB 1333 MHz DDR3 memory, running MAC OS X Lion 10.7.5). These times
include also the auxiliary non-determinism and failure analyses. The resulting times are
encouraging, despite the currently relatively inefficient implementation of the interface
with the Mathematica system which is used for solving recurrence equations.
6 Related Work
Several other analyses for resources have been proposed in the literature. Some of them
just focus on one particular resource (usually execution or heap consumption), but it
seems clear that they could be generalized. We already mentioned RAML
(Hoffmann et al. 2012) in Section 5. Their approach differs from ours in the theoretical framework being used: RAML uses a type and effect system, whereas we use abstract interpretation. Another difference is the use of polynomials in RAML, which
allows a complete method of resolution but limits the type of closed forms that can
be analyzed. In contrast, we use recurrence equations, which have no complete decision procedure, but encompass a much larger class of functions. Type systems are
also used to guide inference in (Grobauer 2001) and (Igarashi and Kobayashi 2002).
In (Nielson et al. 2002), the authors use sparsity information to infer asymptotic complexities, instead of recurrences. (Giesl et al. 2012) uses symbolic evaluation graphs to
derive termination and complexity properties. The recurrence equation approach was
proposed originally by Wegbreit (Wegbreit 1975). Similarly to CiaoPP’s previous analysis, the approach of (Albert et al. 2011) applies the recurrence equation method directly
(i.e., not within an abstract interpretation framework). (Rosendahl 1989) shows a complexity analysis based on abstract interpretation over a step-counting version of functional programs, but which does not generate closed forms. Types with embedded size
information have also been proposed by (Vasconcelos and Hammond 2003) for functional
programs. Our sized type analysis is based on regular types and abstract interpretation,
and deals with the logic programming features such as unification, non-determinism, and
backtracking.
7 Conclusions
We have presented a new formulation of resource analysis as a domain within abstract
interpretation and which uses as input information the sized types that we developed
in (Serrano et al. 2013). Our approach overcomes important limitations of existing resource analyses and enhances their precision. It also benefits from an easier implementation and integration within an abstract interpretation framework such as PLAI/CiaoPP,

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

13

which brings in useful features such as multivariance for free. Finally, the results of our
experimental assessment regarding accuracy and efficiency are quite encouraging.

References
Albert, E., Genaim, S., and Masud, A. N. 2011. More Precise yet Widely Applicable Cost
Analysis. In 12th Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI’11),
R. Jhala and D. Schmidt, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6538. Springer Verlag,
38–53.
Bagnara, R., Pescetti, A., Zaccagnini, A., and Zaffanella, E. 2005. PURRS: Towards
Computer Algebra Support for Fully Automatic Worst-Case Complexity Analysis. Tech. rep.
arXiv:cs/0512056 available from http://arxiv.org/.
Bruynooghe, M. 1991. A practical framework for the abstract interpretation of logic programs.
J. Log. Program. 10, 2, 91–124.
Bueno, F., López-Garcı́a, P., and Hermenegildo, M. 2004. Multivariant Non-Failure Analysis via Standard Abstract Interpretation. In 7th International Symposium on Functional and
Logic Programming (FLOPS 2004). Number 2998 in LNCS. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, 100–116.
Cousot, P. and Cousot, R. 1992. Abstract Interpretation and Applications to Logic Programs. Journal of Logic Programming 13, 2-3, 103–179.
Dart, P. and Zobel, J. 1992. A Regular Type Language for Logic Programs. In Types in
Logic Programming. MIT Press, 157–187.
Debray, S. K. and Lin, N. W. 1993. Cost Analysis of Logic Programs. ACM Transactions
on Programming Languages and Systems 15, 5 (November), 826–875.
Debray, S. K., Lin, N.-W., and Hermenegildo, M. 1990. Task Granularity Analysis in
Logic Programs. In Proc. of the 1990 ACM Conf. on Programming Language Design and
Implementation. ACM Press, 174–188.
Debray, S. K., López-Garcı́a, P., Hermenegildo, M., and Lin, N.-W. 1997. Lower Bound
Cost Estimation for Logic Programs. In 1997 International Logic Programming Symposium.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 291–305.
Giesl, J., Ströder, T., Schneider-Kamp, P., Emmes, F., and Fuhs, C. 2012. Symbolic
evaluation graphs and term rewriting: a general methodology for analyzing logic programs.
In PPDP. ACM, 1–12.
Grobauer, B. 2001. Cost recurrences for DML programs. In International Conference on
Functional Programming. 253–264.
Hermenegildo, M. V., Bueno, F., Carro, M., López, P., Mera, E., Morales, J., and
Puebla, G. 2012. An Overview of Ciao and its Design Philosophy. Theory and Practice of
Logic Programming 12, 1–2 (January), 219–252. http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.5497.
Hoffmann, J., Aehlig, K., and Hofmann, M. 2012. Multivariate amortized resource analysis.
ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 34, 3, 14.
Igarashi, A. and Kobayashi, N. 2002. Resource usage analysis. In Symposium on Principles
of Programming Languages. 331–342.
López-Garcı́a, P., Bueno, F., and Hermenegildo, M. 2010. Automatic Inference of Determinacy and Mutual Exclusion for Logic Programs Using Mode and Type Information. New
Generation Computing 28, 2, 117–206.
López-Garcı́a, P., Darmawan, L., and Bueno, F. 2010. A Framework for Verification and
Debugging of Resource Usage Properties. In Technical Communications of the 26th Int’l.
Conference on Logic Programming (ICLP’10), M. Hermenegildo and T. Schaub, Eds. Leibniz
International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), vol. 7. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
fuer Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 104–113.

14

A. Serrano et al.

Muthukumar, K. and Hermenegildo, M. 1989. Determination of Variable Dependence
Information at Compile-Time Through Abstract Interpretation. In 1989 North American
Conference on Logic Programming. MIT Press, 166–189.
Muthukumar, K. and Hermenegildo, M. 1992. Compile-time Derivation of Variable Dependency Using Abstract Interpretation. Journal of Logic Programming 13, 2/3 (July), 315–347.
Navas, J., Mera, E., López-Garcı́a, P., and Hermenegildo, M. 2007. User-Definable
Resource Bounds Analysis for Logic Programs. In 23rd International Conference on Logic
Programming (ICLP’07). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4670. Springer.
Nielson, F., Nielson, H. R., and Seidl, H. 2002. Automatic complexity analysis. In European
Symposium on Programming. 243–261.
Puebla, G. and Hermenegildo, M. 1996. Optimized Algorithms for the Incremental Analysis
of Logic Programs. In International Static Analysis Symposium (SAS 1996). Number 1145 in
LNCS. Springer-Verlag, 270–284.
Rosendahl, M. 1989. Automatic Complexity Analysis. In 4th ACM Conference on Functional
Programming Languages and Computer Architecture (FPCA’89). ACM Press.
Serrano, A., Lopez-Garcia, P., Bueno, F., and Hermenegildo, M. 2013. Sized Type
Analysis for Logic Programs (technical communication). In Theory and Practice of Logic
Programming, 29th Int’l. Conference on Logic Programming (ICLP’13) Special Issue, On-line
Supplement, T. Swift and E. Lamma, Eds. Vol. 13. Cambridge U. Press, 1–14.
Vasconcelos, P. B. and Hammond, K. 2003. Inferring cost equations for recursive, polymorphic and higher-order functional programs. In IFL, P. W. Trinder, G. Michaelson, and
R. Pena, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3145. Springer, 86–101.
Vaucheret, C. and Bueno, F. 2002. More Precise yet Efficient Type Inference for Logic
Programs. In International Static Analysis Symposium. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 2477. Springer-Verlag, 102–116.
Wegbreit, B. 1975. Mechanical Program Analysis. Communications of the ACM 18, 9.

15

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types
Appendix A The Abstract Interpretation Framework

Abstract interpretation (Cousot and Cousot 1992) is a framework for static analysis.
Execution of the program on a concrete domain is simulated in an abstract domain,
simpler than the former one. Both domains must be lattices, hP(Σ), ⊆i and h∆, ⊑i. To
go from one to another we use a pair of functions, called abstraction α : P(Σ) → ∆ and
concretization γ : ∆ → P(Σ), which should form a Galois connection:
γ

−−
−− h∆, ⊑i if and only if α(x) ⊑ y ⇐⇒ x ⊆ γ(y)
hP(Σ), ⊆i ←
−−
α→
Intuitively α(σ) generates the smallest element in ∆ that contains all the elements in σ,
and γ(δ) computes all the concrete elements represented by δ.
The methodology is very general, so we focus specifically on the PLAI
(Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1989; Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1992) framework.
The PLAI algorithm abstracts execution and-or trees similarly to (Bruynooghe 1991)
but represents the abstract executions implicitly and computes fixpoints efficiently using
memo tables, dependency tracking, etc. The procedure is generic (parametric) in the
sense that it factors out the abstraction of program execution flow (the execution and-or
trees), which is common to many different analyses, from other (mainly data-related)
abstractions, which are more application-specific, and which are encoded as one or more
abstract domains. It is also goal dependent: it takes as input a pair (L, λc ) representing
a predicate along with an abstraction of the call patterns (in the chosen abstract domain) and produces an abstraction λo which overapproximates the possible outputs, as
well as all different call/success pattern pairs for all called predicates in all paths in the
program and the corresponding abstract information at all other program points, for all
procedure versions. This algorithm is the basis of the PLAI abstract analyzer found in
CiaoPP (Hermenegildo et al. 2012), where we have integrated a working implementation
of the proposed resource analysis. In PLAI, abstract domains are pluggable units which
need to define implementations of ⊑, least upper bound (⊔), bottom (⊥), and a number
of other operations related to predicate calls and successes.
For any clause h : − q1 , . . . , qn ., let λi and λi+1 be the abstract substitutions to the
left and to the right of literal qi , and λcall i and λsuccess i their projections onto the
variables of qi respectively. λ1 and λn+1 are the entry and exit substitutions of the
clause respectively, denoted also as βentry and βexit . We can show this graphically as
follows:
λcall
β1,entry h1

β1,exit

p

λsuccess

. . . βm,entry hm βm,exit

βentry
λ1

p1

h

βexit

λ2 . . . λn pn λn+1

To compute λsuccess from λcall of a generic (sub)goal p(x̄) with predicate p:
1. Generate a βentry i from λcall for each of the m clauses Ci defining the predicate
p. This transfers the unification of the subgoal and head variables into ∆.
2. For each clause Ci , compute βexit i from βentry i , and then project βexit i back
again onto the subgoal variables, obtaining λ′i .
m
F
λ′i .
3. Aggregate all the exit substitutions using the least upper bound, λsuccess =
i=1

16

A. Serrano et al.

Computing βexit from βentry is straightforward: set βentry as λ1 . Then, project it onto
the variables appearing in the call to the first literal q1 , obtaining λcall 1 for q1 , and
compute λsuccess 1 from it using the procedure mentioned above. Now λ1 is integrated
with this success substitution, referred to as extending λ1 with λsuccess 1 . The result is
set as λ2 , for which the same series of steps is performed with respect to the second
literal q2 . The process continues until λn+1 is obtained, which is actually βexit .
In the process, more than one call substitution may appear for the same predicate.
This is called multivariance of predicates. Furthermore, if the predicate is recursive, a
fixpoint needs to be computed. To do so, the process above is iterated starting from the
bottom element of the lattice, ⊥.
(Muthukumar and Hermenegildo 1992; Puebla and Hermenegildo 1996) describe performant algorithms for this purpose, which are implemented in CiaoPP.

Appendix B The Abstract Elements, Redux
Because of space constraints, in the main part of the paper the concrete and abstract
domains have not been described in full. In this section we aim to give a more precise
definition of both elements within the framework of abstract interpretation.
In the concrete domain, the resource usage of a predicate p with respect to a set
of resources ri is given by a set of triples (t, s, rp,i ), where t is a tuple of terms. The
interpretation of such set is that for a call to p with arguments bound to t, the number
of solutions is exactly s and the resource usage of each ri is exactly rp,i . Note that s and
rp,i are actual values, not equations or recurrences. The resource usage is computed by
adding the head cost at the point of entering a clause and the literal cost at the point
of calling a literal in the body, using the usual SLD resolution semantics. This definition
follows closely the one in (López-Garcı́a et al. 2010), but extended to support several
resources and cardinality.
Let dom(e) be the set of tuples of terms t for which a concrete element e has information
over its resource usage. We define e ⊑c e′ if and only if dom(e) ⊆ dom(e′ ) and for each
′
t ∈ dom(e), (p(t), s, rU,i ) = (p(t), s′ , rU,i
). That is, the set of terms of the smaller element
must be a subset of the larger one, and the cardinality and resource usage must coincide
in the common part of their domains.
This concrete domain is abstracted in three different ways, to get a compound domain.
Two of them have already been discussed in the literature: the non-failure and determinacy analyses. Those components of the abstract domain correspond to abstracting the
set of elements t using a regular type abstract domain and then summarizing for those
elements whether s = 0 or s > 0 (for the non-failure domain) and whether s = 1 or
s 6= 1 (for the determinacy one). The f ailed? component of the abstract elements follows
closely the non-failure analysis, keeping different information during the analysis, but
with the same result.
For the recurrences part, we perform several abstractions. First of all, we move from
strict values for the number of solutions and resource usage to value bounds. Thus, the
elements are sets of triples (t, (sL , sU ), (rL,i , rU,i )). The ordering is now given by:
e ⊑1 e′

⇐⇒
and

dom(e) ⊆ dom(e′ )
′
′
for each t ∈ dom(e), (sL , sU ) ⊆ (s′L , s′U ) and (rL,i , rU,i ) ⊆ (rL,i
, rU,i
)

Resource Usage Analysis via Abstract Interpretation Using Sized Types

17

The abstraction function in this case is very simple, we just need to send each value to
an interval with it as only point:
α1 ({(t, s, rp,i )}t ) = {(t, (s, s), (rp,i , rp,i ))}t
The second abstraction involves summarizing the domain of each α1 (e) using the sized
types abstract domain. As discussed in (Serrano et al. 2013), a set of terms is described
via sized types using sized type schemas along with a domain d which tells which are the
values of the bound variables which are covered by the abstract element, and a set of
recurrences r which defines the relations that bound variables must satisfy between them.
When adding resource usage information, apart from the bounds from sized types we can
refer to new variables: sL and sU refer to the upper and lower bound in the number of
solutions, and vresources contains such variables for each resource in the system.
In this case, it is easier to give the concretization function to move from an abstract
element e to one in the intermediate abstract domain:
[
(t, bound(sL ,sU ) (t, r), boundvres (t, r))
γ2 (hd, (sL , sU ), vres , r)i) =
t ∈ γsized types (hd,ri)

where boundv (t, r) returns the upper and lower numerical bounds for the variables v as
given in the recurrences r for the tuple of values t. In few words, γ2 takes all the possible
tuples of values given by the sized type we refer to, and computes the cardinality and
resource usage of each of them as given by the recurrence equations.
The intermediate domain and this concretization function allows us to define an ordering ⊑ in the abstract elements. But, as stated in the main part of the paper, doing so
would entail knowing whether some recurrences define a set that is larger or smaller than
another one. This is an undecidable problem, and thus we need to resort to other checks
which, while being correct, are not complete. In our case, we chose to use a syntactic
check.
From α1 we can obtain the corresponding concretization function γ1 , and from γ2 we
can do the same to obtain an α2 . By composition we obtain the abstraction αr = α2 · α1
and concretization γr = γ1 · γ2 functions that define the Galois connection between
concrete resource usage triples and the abstract domain of recurrence equations.
As stated before, our complete abstract elements:
h(sL , sU ), vresources , f ailed?, d, r, nf, deti
are the combination of that given by hαr , γr i with those of non-failure (which give the
f ailed? and nf components) and determinism (which gives the det component), which
abstract information about s over all possible values. For an abstract element a to be
smaller than b, it must be smaller in all of the three domains at the same time.

